[Amit Varma]: Every year, the government presents its annual budget, and there is enormous fuss over it.
[Amit Varma]: It is a media spectacle, and I wonder when some smart person in the finance ministry
[Amit Varma]: will get the idea of inserting commercial breaks in between the live telecast.
[Amit Varma]: I can totally imagine the finance minister saying, and now to tell you about how we will
[Amit Varma]: recapitalize public sector banks, but first, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This could be India's Super Bowl.
[Amit Varma]: No, but seriously, it irritates me that the budget is given so much importance by people
[Amit Varma]: because it reflects how much coercive power the state has over its subjects.
[Amit Varma]: If the Maybap Indian state did only the things it was supposed to, and interfered nowhere
[Amit Varma]: else, the budget would be insignificant, provide the rule of law, and society will see to its
[Amit Varma]: own prosperity.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever prosperity we do achieve is usually in spite of the interfering state, rather
[Amit Varma]: than helped along by the enabling state.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, that's the world we live in, and the budget does matter because the state has the
[Amit Varma]: power and capacity to mess so much up.
[Amit Varma]: It does also have the capacity to make things a lot better, especially when things are already
[Amit Varma]: so bad because the worst things get, the greater the scope to make things better, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: In such scraps of pointless hope, do people such as me find the will to go on living?
[Amit Varma]: So did this budget give me any cause for hope?
[Amit Varma]: No, it didn't.
[Amit Varma]: But I still look at the bright side of things.
[Amit Varma]: More joblessness means more people will have more time to listen to my podcast.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guests today are the Shah Rukh Khan of economics, the infamous Vivek Kaul, and the
[Amit Varma]: Shyam Benegal of economic policy, Ajay Shah.
[Amit Varma]: I call Ajay that after due thought, because Shyam Benegal's excellent artistic and aesthetic
[Amit Varma]: sense has as little of a reflection in Bollywood as Ajay's fantastic and clear ideas do in
[Amit Varma]: the world of actual policymaking.
[Amit Varma]: In both spheres, populism dominates.
[Amit Varma]: I had Ajay on the show a few weeks ago to discuss his masterful book, In Service of
[Amit Varma]: the Republic, co-written with Vijay Kelkar.
[Amit Varma]: Every patriotic Indian should read it.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, every patriotic Indian should listen to this episode.
[Amit Varma]: But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to the scene and the unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks from around
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: The international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I
[Amit Varma]: talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Download that app and listen to my show.
[Amit Varma]: And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend
[Amit Varma]: an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is Fascism, a Warning by Madeleine Albright.
[Amit Varma]: This is a subject that is relevant today and a book you should listen to.
[Amit Varma]: That's all I'll say about it.
[Amit Varma]: Fascism by Madeleine Albright on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Download their app or visit Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Remember it is Storytel with a single l, Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Guys, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest 1]: Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: Happy to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So Ajay, tell me a little bit about how your book has been doing in the last few weeks.
[Amit Varma]: Is it a load off your shoulders in the sense that now all of this knowledge, these ideas
[Amit Varma]: are actually out there in, you know, in a packaged form and is there a sense of relief?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, it felt great when the book was finished.
[Guest 1]: This is going to sound cliched, but the reception of the book has just been a surprise to me.
[Guest 1]: I thought that this was going to be some obscure geeky book with people like Vivek and you
[Guest 1]: taking interest in it and just about nobody else.
[Guest 1]: In fact, the book seems to have found a life of its own.
[Guest 1]: In the first month after the release of the book, Kelkar and I got 60 speaking invitations
[Guest 1]: and I just seem to be going around the world doing conversations, doing podcast episodes
[Guest 1]: and so on about the book.
[Guest 1]: And it's overwhelming how many people are finding the book to be exciting.
[Guest 1]: I increasingly see bits of it creeping into the culture, which is the best thing imaginable.
[Guest 1]: I was with Junaid Ahmed at a book conversation at the World Bank and he asked me, what's
[Guest 1]: your highest dream for this book in five years?
[Guest 1]: And I said, the highest dream is that these ideas should become commonplace and nobody
[Guest 1]: should even remember they came from us.
[Guest 1]: And bits of that are already visible.
[Amit Varma]: And how have people actually in the business of policymaking responded to it?
[Guest 1]: I think it's too far from practice.
[Guest 1]: I think this is still at the thinking levels.
[Amit Varma]: Do they read?
[Amit Varma]: That's a very good question.
[Amit Varma]: And one question no one can ask you Vivek is, do you write?
[Guest 2]: Because you have written some 24 pieces since the budget came out three days ago.
[Guest 2]: It feels like that.
[Guest 2]: It's cliched.
[Guest 2]: I wrote just five this time and one was actually in Hindi, which was sort of a summary of the
[Amit Varma]: other four.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one criticism I, not of you, but in general of commentators and pundits
[Amit Varma]: that I read on Twitter is that after people stop criticizing the government, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they'll turn to the pundits because all the pundits will say the same old cliched things
[Amit Varma]: year after year that, oh, structural reforms are needed and no, these are just piecemeal
[Amit Varma]: solutions and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And after I read that tweet, I think Siddhanth made a tweet like that.
[Amit Varma]: And then I came across one of your pieces which spoke of structural fixes.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I mean, these are cliches because they're true and it is true that structural fixes
[Amit Varma]: are needed.
[Amit Varma]: But just as a writer, how do you get past the not just the fact that you're writing
[Amit Varma]: five pieces?
[Amit Varma]: How do you not repeat yourself?
[Amit Varma]: But how do you not stop repeating yourself year after year?
[Guest 2]: Because you're basically the same thing, right?
[Guest 2]: I don't have a problem with repeating myself because a lot of people, you know, a lot of
[Guest 2]: writers have this that if you're repeating yourself, it's not the right thing.
[Guest 2]: But my point is, you know, if that's the right thing to say, then that's the right thing
[Guest 2]: to say.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if it's a repeat, it's a repeat.
[Guest 2]: I mean, how does it matter?
[Guest 2]: I mean, see, I have grown up on, you know, masala Hindi movies, they're basically the
[Guest 2]: same, right?
[Guest 2]: Two boys, one girl, three songs, father doesn't like the boy, boy is poor.
[Guest 2]: But people used to enjoy, people watched it over and over again.
[Guest 2]: What I'm trying to say is that when I do this, I'm not being mediocre.
[Guest 2]: But that's what it is.
[Guest 2]: One is when you want to say the right things and two is that there is only so much that
[Amit Varma]: you can say against, you know, that is happening.
[Amit Varma]: Don't shoot the messenger, that's what the truth is, blame the truth, not the truth teller,
[Amit Varma]: as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we kind of start talking about this specific budget, what it did, and
[Amit Varma]: frankly, a lot of it is already feels a bit meh and blah and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But before we kind of get down to the specifics, Ajay, I wanted to ask you, you've actually
[Amit Varma]: been an insider in all of this, you've been part of the process, the process of kind of
[Amit Varma]: making a budget and, you know, getting things out there, give me a little bit of insight
[Amit Varma]: onto that, like how do bureaucrats and politicians think about economic policy per se?
[Guest 1]: My knowledge is old, I left the Ministry of Finance in 2005.
[Guest 1]: I was reasonably aware of how things worked in the 90s as well.
[Guest 1]: So let me describe that world and it may or may not tally up with what is done today.
[Guest 1]: So the way this used to work was like this, that there used to be something called a budget
[Guest 1]: group in the Ministry of Finance, which consisted of the secretaries of the three departments,
[Guest 1]: the Department of Economic Affairs, which does economic policy, the Department of Revenue,
[Guest 1]: which used to do tax administration, and the Department of Expenditure, which is a bit
[Guest 1]: of an accounting operation, which has oversight over the money flows into the departments.
[Guest 1]: These three secretaries, along with the chief economic advisor, would sit with the finance
[Guest 1]: minister every morning.
[Guest 1]: So when I used to be in this, there used to be a budget group meeting every morning, and
[Guest 1]: these four civil servants would sit with the finance minister, and they would debate every
[Guest 1]: morning.
[Guest 1]: Partly, they would debate from scratch, what is it that we would like to do?
[Guest 1]: Partly, they would respond to the large number of notes and proposals and ideas and the impulses
[Guest 1]: that were coming from outside.
[Guest 1]: And day after day, over a two-month period, they would refine the concept of what we want
[Guest 1]: to do this year, where we want to go this year.
[Guest 1]: And that discussion led to these two critical documents that came out.
[Guest 1]: The first was the budget packet, and the other is the economic survey.
[Guest 1]: In the budget packet, it's partly a financial statement about how we propose to raise revenues
[Guest 1]: and how we propose to spend that money.
[Guest 1]: But alongside that is part A of the budget speech, which is a bit of a work plan statement.
[Guest 1]: So it's a promise that over the next one year, these are all the things that various departments
[Guest 1]: of government, all over government, not just the Ministry of Finance, will do.
[Guest 1]: Why is this important?
[Guest 1]: This is important for three reasons.
[Guest 1]: The first is that the budget speech has a certain legal status as a cabinet resolution.
[Guest 1]: So short of being a parliamentary law, it is a document to take seriously.
[Guest 1]: Every word matters in an almost legalistic way.
[Guest 1]: So it's a commitment device where various departments of government commit themselves
[Guest 1]: that I'm going to do this.
[Guest 1]: Second, in the same vein, because that budget speech is then backed up, was then backed
[Guest 1]: up with a follow-up and a tracking mechanism through the year, that people all over government
[Guest 1]: would be held accountable for delivery on the sentences in that budget speech.
[Guest 1]: So this tracking mechanism was introduced, I think, at the time when Yashwant Sinha was
[Guest 1]: minister, where every sentence in the budget speech is mapped to one responsible person
[Guest 1]: somewhere in government.
[Guest 1]: And there would be a process of building a spreadsheet through the year that was an MIS
[Guest 1]: about the state of completion of what was done and what was not done.
[Guest 1]: So again, I think that's why the words in the budget speech matter.
[Guest 1]: It's not just a speech.
[Guest 1]: It's a legalistic document where every word counts and the words are actions.
[Guest 1]: They're not statements of aspiration.
[Guest 1]: They're not vacuous phrases.
[Guest 1]: They're actually supposed to be almost legal sentences that are actionable and that can
[Guest 1]: be evaluated.
[Guest 1]: Was it done?
[Guest 1]: Was it not done?
[Guest 1]: The third reason why part A of the budget speech matters, and it flows logically in
[Guest 1]: the budget process, is that in those years, in the 90s and in the 2000s, the Department
[Guest 1]: of Economic Affairs was the engine of economic reform, not just of the Ministry of Finance.
[Guest 1]: The Department of Economic Affairs was the engine of economic reform, and it used budget-making
[Guest 1]: power to negotiate reforms with other ministries.
[Guest 1]: So as an example, the Ministry of Civil Aviation would ask for money to do ABC, and the DEA
[Guest 1]: would say, yeah, we'll give you this money, but you've got to privatize the Bombay and
[Guest 1]: Delhi airports.
[Guest 1]: So this is how deals were made, that surrounding every year's budget process, there would be
[Guest 1]: negotiations that are done for reforms in government more broadly.
[Guest 1]: And that required that the DEA had to have an economics capability more broadly and be
[Guest 1]: able to negotiate meaningfully with every single secretary in government.
[Guest 1]: And then those promises would turn into sentences in the part A, where they become legalistic.
[Guest 1]: It's not just an informal promise that some department makes, which they can later on
[Guest 1]: renege on.
[Guest 1]: Okay, so these are the three reasons why the budget is pretty important.
[Guest 1]: It's a work plan for the year with some legal status behind it, with some negotiation that
[Guest 1]: has led up to it.
[Guest 1]: And it's the stuff that will get done at a high priority.
[Guest 1]: Of course, other things can also be done.
[Guest 1]: But this is like the minimum work plan of the year in terms of what government can do.
[Guest 1]: And now let me describe the role of the Economic Survey.
[Guest 1]: The Economic Survey is a document that's built by the team of economists in the Department
[Guest 1]: of Economic Affairs led by the Chief Economic Advisor.
[Guest 1]: It is not the policy statement of the government.
[Guest 1]: It's a view of the world of the Chief Economic Advisor and the other economists in the Ministry
[Guest 1]: of Finance.
[Guest 1]: It mattered because the Chief Economic Advisor was a member of that budget group.
[Guest 1]: And the Chief Economic Advisor was the intellectual in that group, who was a part of every single
[Guest 1]: discussion that do you really think it's worth privatizing the Bombay and Delhi airport?
[Guest 1]: What's your intellectual construct?
[Guest 1]: What's your intellectual framework?
[Guest 1]: How are we going to think about it?
[Guest 1]: The CEA was present in every budget discussion.
[Guest 1]: And by the way, in those years, the CEA would draft the budget speech.
[Guest 1]: Because the CEA generally had the best writing capabilities compared to many of the career
[Guest 1]: civil servants whose written English is often quite poor.
[Guest 1]: So the CEA was the intellectual who cast a light of economics into every budget discussion.
[Guest 1]: And also personally was the author of the budget speech, the quality of language, the
[Guest 1]: coherence of the budget speech.
[Guest 1]: You can see that richly say in the July 1991 budget speech, or what I experienced some
[Guest 1]: of the budget speeches written by Rakesh Mohan, and so on.
[Guest 1]: So that was the unique role of the CEA.
[Guest 1]: Now, that's all the policy work of the CEA.
[Guest 1]: But you and I as private citizens would find it interesting to read the Economic Survey
[Guest 1]: because it gave a window into the intellectual framework of the CEA and of the economics
[Guest 1]: team inside the Ministry of Finance.
[Guest 1]: Not that they control economic policy, not that they make economic policy.
[Guest 1]: But that they had a seat on the table in all the discussions and influenced the worldview
[Guest 1]: and the philosophy of the Ministry of Finance.
[Guest 1]: Because otherwise, the career civil servants tend to not have much of a worldview.
[Guest 1]: They tend to do more expediency.
[Guest 1]: This was the old arrangement.
[Guest 1]: And so that was the significance of the part A of the budget speech and the Economic Survey
[Guest 1]: and the budget process.
[Amit Varma]: Now, a couple of thoughts kind of strike me here.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a couple of questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is that, which you can answer in a yes or no right away, which is that structurally
[Guest 1]: are things more or less the same?
[Guest 1]: I think they've changed quite a bit.
[Guest 1]: I'm not competent on how things work today.
[Amit Varma]: And the other question is even assuming that there is a structure which is similar to this
[Amit Varma]: with little bits of change here and there.
[Amit Varma]: What strikes me is that the smooth functioning of this seems to depend on having, say, the
[Amit Varma]: right individual with the right impulses in the right places.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you talk about, you know, the third aspect of the budget that you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that it became a tool for the Department of Economic Affairs to negotiate reforms with
[Amit Varma]: other departments.
[Amit Varma]: For example, civil aviation will give this budget if you privatize these airports.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that works both ways.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you assume as in public choice, you'd assume that there's certainly a direction
[Amit Varma]: towards all ministries being captured by special interests.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if that is to be the case, and if that holds true of economic affairs as well, and
[Amit Varma]: you don't have a utopian situation of actually having someone there who is reform minded
[Amit Varma]: and thinks about policy the right way, then what you have is really a negotiation between
[Amit Varma]: special interests.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, none of the reforms that we kind of speak out which are for the larger
[Amit Varma]: good ever really happen, because then you're just negotiating transactional stuff.
[Guest 1]: So I want to take you back into history.
[Guest 1]: We had a terrible time in the 70s and the 80s, in terms of the working of institutions
[Guest 1]: in India.
[Guest 1]: And that gave us a balance of payments crisis, and an IMF program in 81 and 91.
[Guest 1]: And after that, a larger consciousness developed in the Indian government process, that there
[Guest 1]: is something special and important about the Ministry of Finance, about the Department
[Guest 1]: of Economic Affairs.
[Guest 1]: And there was a very self conscious attempt at building a certain kind of capability in
[Guest 1]: the Department of Economic Affairs.
[Guest 1]: I remember, there was a time when I was in the Department of Economic Affairs, where
[Guest 1]: we were just playing games, sitting over chai and arguing about things.
[Guest 1]: And we had the rough calculation with paper and pen, that if the economists in the Department
[Guest 1]: of Economic Affairs stepped out and became a new academic economics department in the
[Guest 1]: country, we would be the number one economics department in the country.
[Guest 1]: That was the kind of firepower that had accumulated in the DEA in those years.
[Guest 1]: So in similar fashion, I just want to talk about tax policy, where your question shines
[Guest 1]: through very nicely.
[Guest 1]: When you have tax policy that is being controlled by the Department of Revenue, then you have
[Guest 1]: a real problem because the tax administrators will choose tax policy that is convenient
[Guest 1]: for themselves.
[Guest 1]: And one of the historic achievements of the 91 onwards period is that the primacy in tax
[Guest 1]: policy shifted from the Department of Revenue to the Department of Economic Affairs.
[Guest 1]: Elsewhere in the world, this is done explicitly, that in places like the UK and the US, there
[Guest 1]: is no role for tax administrators in determining tax policy.
[Guest 1]: We didn't do that institutionally in India, but de facto, that's what happened in India
[Guest 1]: also starting from the 91 reforms, that we got great progress in tax policy.
[Guest 1]: You may recall, we started out with a big marginal income tax rate, like 98%.
[Guest 1]: We had a wealth tax.
[Guest 1]: We had all sorts of craziness going on in tax policy, when tax policy was dominated
[Guest 1]: by the tax administrators.
[Guest 1]: And from 91 onwards, the primacy of tax policy moved out to DEA.
[Guest 1]: And somewhere in the last 15 years, tax policy went back to the Department of Revenue.
[Guest 1]: And that's part of a lot of the troubles that we've been having in terms of the conduct
[Guest 1]: of how India thinks about taxes.
[Guest 1]: So this is an example of the role of an economics team in DEA to think about taxes as opposed
[Guest 1]: to letting it be controlled by the tax administrators.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be correct to say, like, I tend to be skeptical about the drift of government
[Amit Varma]: towards being captured.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be correct to say that, okay, 91, we were lucky that we had that crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And all the reforms that happened, happened not just in terms of policy, but in terms
[Amit Varma]: of actually getting people in department who had a strategic vision, who looked at the
[Amit Varma]: bigger picture and got this stuff through.
[Amit Varma]: But what appears to have happened since then, and even though you haven't been in the ministry,
[Amit Varma]: you've been close enough to comment on it.
[Amit Varma]: And what appears to have happened is a drift back to the old kind of system where your
[Amit Varma]: chief economic advisor is not necessarily any more an academic who is, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: big alpha in the room respected by everyone, a person with a vision.
[Amit Varma]: But perhaps like in this case, frankly, I must say to political crony who is there because
[Amit Varma]: he wrote columns in support of demonetization, which not many respectable economists would
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: And I won't ask you to comment on that.
[Amit Varma]: And again, like you pointed out, tax policy going back into the hands of tax administration.
[Amit Varma]: So two questions, is this sort of some kind of cyclical thing which can be reversed or
[Amit Varma]: is it necessarily as I would skeptically say, that the tendency of government to be captured
[Guest 1]: power and money, the interplay.
[Guest 1]: So I want to again, locate this in our historical experience, as Kelkar emphasizes, at the time
[Guest 1]: of the 1991 reforms, there was actually remarkable capabilities in the community.
[Guest 1]: There were people in many parts of government.
[Guest 1]: There was a very strong academic community, which had understood that the old Indian socialism
[Guest 1]: was broken, which had thought hard about the kinds of changes that we might like to see.
[Guest 1]: And then in that context, when the crisis came, there was a capability in doing something
[Guest 1]: differently.
[Guest 1]: And as you know, in the book, we actually belabor this point that don't overstate the
[Guest 1]: extent to which a crisis will give us the requisite changes.
[Guest 1]: Pakistan has had 14 IMF programs and never bootstrapped itself out of a low level equilibrium.
[Guest 1]: So I would emphasize some very high minded people who took away the lessons of the 81
[Guest 1]: and the 91 IMF programs and the balance of payments crisis, who thought about how to
[Guest 1]: do things differently.
[Guest 1]: And who took one key lesson away that you need to build intellectual and professional
[Guest 1]: capability in the Ministry of Finance in the Department of Economic Affairs.
[Guest 1]: For example, there was a break in convention when Monte Carlo Alia became the finance secretary,
[Guest 1]: who was the first amongst equals, even though he was not the most senior of the secretaries,
[Guest 1]: but that's the right way to do it.
[Guest 1]: It is only the secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, who has the full picture, who should
[Guest 1]: be the finance secretary.
[Guest 1]: And these are not things that can be easily messed with and you are able to then maintain
[Guest 1]: performance.
[Guest 1]: So I think that we need to introspect a lot more about these institutional foundations
[Guest 1]: of good economic policy.
[Guest 2]: What I wanted to ask you, Ajay, is that, you know, we have this funny thing, you have one
[Guest 2]: guy who's finance secretary one day, and then becomes tourism secretary the next day.
[Guest 2]: So how do you get, you know, we live in the era of specialization.
[Guest 2]: So how is this some sort of a joke or?
[Guest 1]: Well, the best civil servants are good managers, they will reply that is Steve Jobs an engineer?
[Guest 1]: Is Tim Cook an engineer?
[Guest 1]: So I think that the truth is halfway, that you do need leadership skills.
[Guest 1]: Leadership is a very human capability.
[Guest 1]: It's about a certain kind of charisma, it's about handling people, it's about pulling
[Guest 1]: technical teams together of geeks, and being able to get work out of many, many geeks.
[Guest 1]: It's about communications capabilities, it's about good human capabilities of being well
[Guest 1]: liked by people below and above you.
[Guest 1]: So I will give that to the leader.
[Guest 1]: But it's also about understanding, right?
[Guest 1]: So you do need a body of knowledge, and it does need a certain kind of capability.
[Guest 1]: So I'm not one of those who will argue that you always need to be a professional economist
[Guest 1]: to be a good secretary DEA.
[Guest 1]: But I will also say that you do what in government is called 10-20 years in finance.
[Guest 1]: So you know, look, an ideal person will have spent 5-10 years in a finance department in
[Guest 1]: Tamil Nadu, will have spent some time at the IMF, will have grown up the hierarchy inside
[Guest 1]: the Ministry of Finance, will have gone a little bit distance away, Economic Advisory
[Guest 1]: Council to the Prime Minister, you know, and then developed 10-20-30 years of job relevant
[Guest 1]: experience, which is the ideal preparation to do DEA.
[Guest 1]: And that used to be the way things were done in the past, and it's less so today.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, to add a little bit to the point that Vivek was making, the fundamental difference
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me between, say, Steve Jobs and a bureaucrat is the incentives at play, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you only rise in the private sector if you perform, you know, we think of Steve
[Amit Varma]: Jobs because of the survivorship bias, he's a guy who happened to perform at that insane
[Amit Varma]: level and got up there.
[Amit Varma]: And it is relevant what he was trained in, he was very good at what he did.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a way of measuring that, which is something that the market did.
[Guest 1]: To be fair, Steve Jobs had the genius for asking a question, let's build something like
[Guest 1]: an iPod, or an iPad.
[Guest 1]: But he didn't really know anything about how to do it.
[Guest 1]: That's a distinction I want to make.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm saying that genius gets rewarded in the free market, in government, basically
[Amit Varma]: where you rank in the IAS exam, which you, the civil, the UPSC exam, which you give when
[Amit Varma]: you're 20-21 will determine promotions for the rest of your career.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, if you were going to judge, say, Steve Jobs on what he was doing at 21,
[Guest 2]: you know, he probably...
[Guest 2]: But I think Ajay answered my question.
[Guest 2]: I mean, what I was basically trying to say is that, I mean, I was also not even for a
[Guest 2]: moment suggesting that the head of DEA should be an economist, but there has to be some
[Guest 2]: experience along the way.
[Guest 2]: But you know, so I find it very funny that, so Arvind Mayaram, excellent example, was
[Guest 2]: the finance secretary, and then they made him the tourism secretary.
[Guest 2]: Now tourism in itself is a very, very specialized area.
[Guest 2]: So is finance.
[Guest 2]: So, I find that a little, you know, difficult to handle.
[Guest 2]: Because I mean, the same thing happened with Subhash Chandragaru, you know, he was finance
[Guest 2]: secretary, and then he was made power secretary, the power in, you know, the kind of regulations
[Guest 2]: and everything that are there in India.
[Guest 2]: It is a, it's a minefield in itself.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: So Vivek, on the way in, on the people who rise into the DEA, some of the most important
[Guest 1]: stints that they do are at a much younger level, when they are a director level officer,
[Guest 1]: when they're a joint secretary, if they've done time inside the DEA, that really helps.
[Guest 1]: So DEA is actually the ground in which we grow the future leadership cadre for economic
[Guest 1]: policy.
[Guest 1]: Or again, that is the way things were done many, many years ago.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, what role do political incentives play, for example, in the last episode, you
[Amit Varma]: did point out that it is in one sense, to the interest of a party to actually, you know,
[Amit Varma]: have a shadow cabinet and have competent people running their economic policy.
[Amit Varma]: And when they come to government, you know, start implementing that while you have your
[Amit Varma]: five year term ahead of you, which seems to make sense.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if all that was there in politics was you come to power, you govern well, and
[Amit Varma]: on the basis of the governance, you get elected again.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not exactly how the chain is.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you look at the current party in power, you don't have that situation where
[Amit Varma]: they seem to value that kind of governance and building that kind of competence.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you, you know, they started with a bunch of pretty remarkable economists in
[Amit Varma]: their team, so to say with Raghuram Rajan and Subramanian and all of that, and they
[Amit Varma]: all kind of left and, you know, even those who have remained, I think, have, to some
[Amit Varma]: extent, debased themselves by supporting things like demonetization and defending the monstrosity
[Amit Varma]: that the GST has become.
[Amit Varma]: Is the politics in part responsible for the degradation of the process like you've kind
[Amit Varma]: of described?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the process has degraded, you would accept.
[Guest 1]: Vivek, if I may, again, I think I'm halfway to, again, make an analogy with corporations.
[Guest 1]: In Hindustan Lever, you will want a phenomenal capability in branding and in marketing and
[Guest 1]: in distribution.
[Guest 1]: Okay, but all the branding and the marketing and the distribution is not a substitute for
[Guest 1]: actually the R&D that develops good products, and the manufacturing and the supply chain
[Guest 1]: management that delivers the products all over the country.
[Guest 1]: So I think it's not either or, it's both.
[Guest 1]: Now, my opinion is that the politicians of that period took away a lesson from the balance
[Guest 1]: of payments crisis of 81 and of 91, saying that this is too costly for us.
[Guest 1]: So let's build an intellectual capability in economic policy, and then we'll, of course,
[Guest 1]: go on and do our politics.
[Guest 1]: So all of us know the history of that period.
[Guest 1]: It's not as if post-91 politics was characterized by consistent greatness, they were not paragons
[Guest 1]: of excellence.
[Guest 1]: It was a practical and logical thing to do.
[Guest 1]: So I think that the Indian political system has to ask itself, what are the costs and
[Guest 1]: benefits of greater intellectual capacity in the economic policy process?
[Guest 1]: We've seen various kinds of experiments of doing it more and doing it less, and let history
[Guest 1]: judge what is the most useful thing to do, and whether there is a causal connection between
[Guest 1]: the kind of Department of Economic Affairs that you build and the kind of long-term growth
[Guest 1]: outcomes that you get.
[Guest 1]: The links are not there in the short term.
[Guest 1]: In the short term, it will always appear that there are no consequences to diminishing the
[Guest 1]: institutional capacity of the DEA and of the other economic policy institutional apparatus.
[Guest 1]: But is there a link in the medium term?
[Guest 1]: Is there a link in the long term?
[Guest 1]: I believe the answer is yes.
[Guest 1]: And it is for the people in politics to debate whether those kinds of time horizons and those
[Guest 1]: considerations of performance are salient when thinking about their own optimization.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And that's again a problem we again, I won't go over at ground again, we discussed it in
[Amit Varma]: the episode we did where the issue is that a politician always has a very short time
[Amit Varma]: horizon in front of him.
[Amit Varma]: The next election is not even five years away, it's all the time because state elections
[Amit Varma]: keep happening all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And if you are asked to build capacity or do things that will pay off in the extreme
[Amit Varma]: long term, what are the sort of incentives there?
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, Vivek, if I may turn to you, one of Ajay's colleagues at NIPFP,
[Amit Varma]: a former colleague, Suyash Rai, who is now at Carnegie India, wrote this piece where
[Amit Varma]: he said that this budget is more tactics and strategy.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that that is a case that there is the absence of somebody sitting in
[Amit Varma]: making an overall plan?
[Amit Varma]: Because at one level, you could say that a lot of it is piecemeal announcements, yeh
[Amit Varma]: karenge, woh karenge, and possibly the result of sort of different silos within the government
[Amit Varma]: demanding this or demanding that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no overall broader vision.
[Guest 2]: Is that a sense you're getting?
[Guest 2]: I haven't read Suyash's piece, so I don't know.
[Guest 2]: But what I can, I mean, I can, I'll give you an example here.
[Guest 2]: So, in this year's economic survey, and also in the speech, in Finance Minister's speech,
[Guest 2]: was a mention of the fact that we need to become a part of global supply chains, okay.
[Guest 2]: So, exports over the last, let's say, 20 years have happened if you are a part of global
[Guest 2]: supply chain.
[Guest 2]: I mean, like, take the example of China, right.
[Guest 2]: In fact, the best example is that of the iPhone.
[Guest 2]: So, everything that goes into the iPhone is made in different parts of the world, and
[Guest 2]: then it gets assembled in China, right.
[Guest 2]: So, in that sense, China is a part of a global value chain.
[Guest 2]: Now, it may obviously be that assembling is the probably the lowest part of the value
[Guest 2]: chain, but it helps because it is a labor intensive industry, right.
[Guest 2]: Years later, we have started to talk about it.
[Guest 2]: Now, at the same time, there has been a rise in protectionism.
[Guest 2]: In fact, Arun Jaitley, in the last budget speech that he made, said very, very clearly
[Guest 2]: that, you know, we are going against what has been policy for the last 20-25 years.
[Guest 2]: So, now, the moment you start, you know, going towards protectionism, you're obviously, you
[Guest 2]: know, allowing the local guy not to compete.
[Guest 2]: And if you can't compete, you know, how do you become a part of the global supply chain?
[Guest 2]: So, there is an inherent contradiction.
[Guest 2]: At one part, you're talking about the fact that we need to export more, become a, you
[Guest 2]: know, part of a global supply chain, and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: And on the other part, you're increasing custom duties on products.
[Guest 2]: So, something as simple as I was talking to, you know, some random guy, and he was telling
[Guest 2]: me about something as simple as porcelain plates, right.
[Guest 2]: Now, a lot of hotels, you know, they imported from China simply because we don't make those
[Guest 2]: plates in India.
[Guest 2]: We don't make plates which are good enough in India.
[Guest 2]: So, like, something like, you know, a big hotel would require a plate which can be loaded
[Guest 2]: onto a dishwasher.
[Guest 2]: So, that kind of product is not available in India.
[Guest 2]: Now, the moment you increase the customs duty on that, you're essentially making his life
[Guest 2]: difficult.
[Guest 2]: So, it's not, so, see, I find it very difficult when, you know, when people say, Chinese product.
[Guest 2]: But the point is, at the end of the day, no one is forcing an average Indian to buy a
[Guest 2]: Chinese product, right.
[Guest 2]: We buy Chinese products, knowingly, if, I mean, a lot of people buy unknowingly as well.
[Guest 2]: But if you're buying a Chinese product knowingly, you're doing it because you feel that the
[Guest 2]: product has more value for money.
[Guest 2]: So, the moment, you know, you start talking about protectionism, you're essentially going
[Guest 2]: against the average consumer.
[Guest 2]: And you know, I mean, this is something you and I have discussed over and over again,
[Guest 2]: that when you sort of increase protectionism, the scene effect is that someone benefits.
[Guest 2]: But there are a whole lot of unseen effects as well.
[Guest 2]: Well, let's say, you know, the Chinese mobile phone companies operating in India, there
[Guest 2]: are a lot of custom duties are put, and then Chinese mobile phones become expensive, and
[Guest 2]: then people start buying mobile phones made in India, okay.
[Guest 2]: So automatically, that mobile phone being made in India will be expensive than what
[Guest 2]: is the Chinese mobile phone.
[Guest 2]: So everyone has a sort of a consumption basket, right, I mean, we will not suddenly start
[Guest 2]: to make more money.
[Guest 2]: So, if you're spending more money on a particular product, we'll obviously cut it down on something
[Guest 2]: else.
[Guest 2]: So, it may benefit a particular sector and a particular product, but it hurts the overall
[Amit Varma]: economy.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, before I come to Ajay, I'll kind of sum up with the two broad unseen effects
[Amit Varma]: of protectionism seem to be.
[Amit Varma]: One of course, is that if I am paying, because of tariffs on foreign products, let's say
[Amit Varma]: a foreign Chinese widget was available for 20 rupees, I instead, you know, there's a
[Amit Varma]: tariff on that, so I have to buy the Indian product for 25.
[Amit Varma]: The unseen effect is a five bucks, which I don't have to spend on something else, which
[Amit Varma]: would otherwise have gone into the economy and generated jobs and generated productivity.
[Amit Varma]: And the second unseen effect is also that the Indian firms aren't being forced to compete.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, like, you know, if those tariffs were not there, the Indian firms would also
[Amit Varma]: have to lift their game to be able to provide enough value for money to sell at 20 or whatever
[Amit Varma]: they have to match and their standard, their quality would go up and the good guys would
[Amit Varma]: survive.
[Amit Varma]: And that would, in fact, then lift them to do better in the exports market.
[Guest 2]: And I just add one point.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, when I was growing up as a kid, during Holi, the water pistols that used to
[Guest 2]: be available, and if you compare those water pistols with the kind of Chinese made water
[Guest 2]: pistols that come, I mean, the difference is huge that the product available now is
[Guest 2]: so much better than the rubbish that used to be sold back then.
[Guest 2]: So, ultimately, the benefit is for the consumer, obviously, the producer of those, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the water pistol, the pichkari has lost out, because he couldn't compete.
[Amit Varma]: I'm utterly amazed at your recent scrutiny of water pistols, it seems to be the case.
[Amit Varma]: Why are you examining water pistols?
[Guest 2]: I'm not, I'm just telling you something.
[Guest 1]: I second that.
[Guest 1]: When I first went to America, this was one of the things that struck me, the water guns
[Unknown]: were so great.
[Guest 1]: I love those water guns, and today those lovely water guns are ubiquitous in India, there's
[Guest 1]: no fuss anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in the olden days, the water guns in India were just bad.
[Amit Varma]: To come back to the strategy versus tactics kind of thing, you know, you've written recently
[Amit Varma]: that and I think it's in your book also, I don't remember if it's in your book, but you've
[Amit Varma]: written about it recently, how in the 2000s, Vijay Kelkar and Rakesh Mohan rallied the
[Amit Varma]: Ministry of Finance around the slogan, every time we cut tariffs, our exports go up, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, right, which is one of the unseen effects that and which is very counterintuitive to
[Amit Varma]: people that if you cut tariffs, you will have imports coming in, why should exports go up,
[Amit Varma]: but they force your local guys to be competitive, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of that thinking had come because like you pointed out over the decades from
[Amit Varma]: the 80s onwards, that intellectual capacity had built up and you actually had people like
[Amit Varma]: that in positions of power.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of those insights are counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: So you do need people with specific learning and insights.
[Amit Varma]: You can't, you know, just sort of, and today, it seems that we are, you know, a lot of those
[Amit Varma]: lessons have sort of been reversed in the sort of a lot of measures that these guys
[Amit Varma]: carry out seem populist, and they're intuitive, and they seem to make sense.
[Amit Varma]: But if you understand economics, you know that they have the opposite effect.
[Guest 1]: Similarly, I want to call out Arvind Veermani, who used to have a missionary zeal around
[Guest 1]: one proposition.
[Guest 1]: Okay, and it seems a little counterintuitive, but it's worth recounting.
[Guest 1]: He used to emphasize how important it is that if you're going to have a customs tariff,
[Guest 1]: just have a single uniform rate, don't have the slightest variation in rates, okay, because
[Guest 1]: there are huge effective protection rates that can come about from very modest differences
[Guest 1]: in duties.
[Guest 1]: Like if you have a 10% duty on crude oil and a 20% duty on petroleum products, it works
[Guest 1]: out that you're actually giving a gigantic effective protection to refineries, and so
[Guest 1]: on.
[Guest 1]: So, I think many of those people used to appear semi-unhinged when they went around selling
[Guest 1]: the larger community on each of these propositions, and I think that's the kind of passion that
[Guest 1]: it takes.
[Guest 1]: It takes that certain kind of passion to just get fixated by an idea and to talk about it,
[Guest 1]: to woo people, to persuade people, and over some years, the giant processes of public
[Guest 1]: policy start moving in that direction, and we started getting some unification of rates
[Guest 1]: and the reduction of rate dispersion came into the policy agenda.
[Guest 1]: This stuff is not easy, and it takes a mixture of deep intellectual insights and a certain
[Guest 1]: selfless willingness to not earn political capital in all transactions.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the ability to sell economics is not easy.
[Guest 2]: So, you need to have that deep understanding so that you can explain things in a very simple
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: This is why we call you the Shah Rukh Khan of economics.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't do policy.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, that's very true.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I mean, there are essentially sort of two kinds of things that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we discussed before the show that we'll talk about on the show.
[Amit Varma]: One is a meta level of thinking about the budget and so on and so forth, the strategy
[Amit Varma]: as it were.
[Amit Varma]: The other is sort of the level of tactics ki yeh galat kya, wo galat kya, yeh galat
[Amit Varma]: kya, you know, and Vivek has written more about the latter recently in the around 43
[Amit Varma]: pieces he's written since the budget came out.
[Amit Varma]: And you Ajay have written, you know, an excellent piece in Business Standard, which will be
[Amit Varma]: linked from the show notes, though, you know, there's a paywall, but we link it anyway for,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and encourage people to subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote a line from that and ask you to elaborate on that, which is you basically
[Amit Varma]: said, quote, the budget speech has done well to avoid the calls for a large fiscal expansion
[Amit Varma]: and propping up GDP growth, turning around economic conditions requires greater strategic
[Amit Varma]: thinking about the relationship between the state and the individual and addressing the
[Amit Varma]: unease of private persons that has manifested itself in private investment, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: which goes a little bit against, you know, a lot of what the commentary art has been
[Amit Varma]: saying before the budget is that we need fiscal expansion that we need to somehow boost consumption
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And you've said that no, our problem is more fundamental.
[Guest 1]: So can you elaborate on that?
[Guest 1]: So I'm going to hand wave around some magnitudes.
[Guest 1]: These are all complicated estimates, and I'm happy to waste a half day on estimation.
[Guest 1]: But right now, please take my word for it on certain broad numbers.
[Guest 1]: My podcast often lasts a half day, but nevermind.
[Guest 1]: At its peak in about 2007-8, private corporate gross fixed capital formation, which is buzzwords
[Guest 1]: for investment, was about 16% of GDP.
[Guest 1]: And there's been a decline of about 10 percentage points of GDP.
[Guest 1]: So the first big ballpark figure to keep in mind is that the decline in private corporate
[Guest 1]: investment works out to about 10% of GDP.
[Guest 1]: 10% of GDP is a gigantic number.
[Guest 1]: It's a very, very large number.
[Guest 1]: So you could say, we've got a demand shortfall.
[Guest 1]: Let's go overcome that.
[Guest 1]: So in some sense, you'd need to do 10% of GDP more by way of government spending as
[Guest 1]: compared to where we were in 2007-8.
[Guest 1]: Now is that even feasible?
[Guest 1]: Do we have that kind of fiscal capacity?
[Guest 1]: Do we have that fiscal headroom?
[Guest 1]: The next ballpark number is that the true state of the union government's fiscal deficit
[Guest 1]: is presently about 6%.
[Guest 1]: And under any reasonable conduct of fiscal policy institutions, it is unreasonable to
[Guest 1]: think of anything more than 1% or at most 2% of a move in a year.
[Guest 1]: So note that the fiscal stimulus, many people are a little confused on this.
[Guest 1]: The fiscal stimulus, when you go from a 6% deficit to an 8% deficit, is 2%.
[Guest 1]: It's not like you are adding 8% to demand when you go from 6 to 8.
[Guest 1]: You're adding 2% to demand when you go from 6 to 8%.
[Guest 1]: So it seems to me that these magnitudes are far apart.
[Guest 1]: And in fact, I also worry that we will be in a difficult fiscal state if we actually
[Guest 1]: go from a 6% deficit to an 8% deficit.
[Guest 1]: So I was pleased that the budget does not do such a thing.
[Guest 1]: I think that they've broadly retained the status quo of perhaps being about 6%.
[Guest 1]: I don't yet know a good analysis of this year's numbers, but perhaps it will be about 6%.
[Guest 1]: It seems to be something similar to what was done last year.
[Guest 1]: And then that takes you to the problem that what is this demand shortfall in the economy
[Guest 1]: and how could you change something?
[Guest 1]: And I'd say go to the root cause.
[Guest 1]: The root cause is that private persons have pulled back from investing.
[Guest 1]: We've gone from 16% to 6%.
[Guest 1]: We've got to go into the heads of those private people and wonder why.
[Guest 1]: So what has changed the optimism, the confidence, the trust of private persons in building businesses
[Guest 1]: in India, in investing in India, in committing financial capital in India?
[Guest 1]: And that takes you to the relationship between the state and the citizenry.
[Guest 1]: That do we have the rule of law environment, do we have a government which can be trusted?
[Guest 1]: Is there too much business model risk because of a government that interferes without warning
[Guest 1]: in the working of my business?
[Guest 1]: Is there too much legal and regulatory risk when you have CBI, SEBI, income tax, SFIO,
[Guest 1]: ED, dot, dot, dot, prowling at your door?
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: These are the kinds of questions to ask.
[Guest 1]: And as you know, Kelkar and I have written a book on these themes of doing a first principles
[Guest 1]: understanding of what is appropriate relationship between the government and the resident, and
[Guest 1]: what is going wrong in India about that relationship and how we need to change that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And what also strikes me Ajay, that when you speak about private people feeling confidence
[Amit Varma]: in the rule of law and in the structure of the state and so on, and it feels to me that's
[Amit Varma]: also affected because of, you know, I think since 2011, and certainly more recently, what
[Amit Varma]: people call tax terrorism has just gone up massively.
[Amit Varma]: And that's been exacerbated by the pressure on the government to increase tax revenues,
[Amit Varma]: because tax revenues, every year, you know, simply don't meet what the expectations of
[Amit Varma]: the government, and that relationship just gets worse and worse.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, another very interesting stat, which I pointed out in your book is the massive
[Amit Varma]: flight of millionaires over the last few years from the country, and, you know, which is
[Amit Varma]: indicative of larger problem.
[Amit Varma]: You can't just say, oh, a few elite, rich riches are leaving the country, let it be,
[Amit Varma]: but they are leaving for a reason.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where the job creation and the entrepreneurship and the drive comes from.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, that's something that we should worry about.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, is any cognizance of all of this, that how do you build confidence in
[Amit Varma]: people?
[Guest 1]: Well, so this is the frontiers of the Indian economic policy debate.
[Guest 1]: As you said, many people are thinking around small practical things, like let's raise the
[Guest 1]: deficit a bit, or let's raise some customs duties a bit, and let's solve the problem
[Guest 1]: of the NBFC sector.
[Guest 1]: It's no longer a problem that can be addressed in those small ways.
[Guest 1]: I think it requires going back to the foundation.
[Guest 1]: In the firm data, there is a very interesting story about smaller problems versus larger
[Guest 1]: problems.
[Guest 1]: In 2013, 14, 14, 15, 15, 16, you see what is called a normal credit profile, that the
[Guest 1]: firms with high credit risk have pulled back on investment, but the firms with low credit
[Guest 1]: risk continue to invest significantly.
[Guest 1]: But from 2017, 18 onwards, you see weak investment by all kinds of firms, whether firm is credit
[Guest 1]: stressed or not credit stressed, investment has pulled back.
[Guest 1]: So why did it change for the latter category?
[Guest 1]: I think in that early period, we were in the early stages of the balance sheet crisis,
[Guest 1]: and there was still optimism about how the overall Indian growth story would work out.
[Guest 1]: But some firms were credit constrained.
[Guest 1]: The lenders were unwilling to commit to those firms, while other firms were able to continue
[Guest 1]: to invest.
[Guest 1]: So that is where we got what I would call a normal credit profile, that there was good
[Guest 1]: investment by the healthy firms, and there was a crimping of investment by the firms
[Guest 1]: with high credit risk.
[Guest 1]: But in the more recent years, starting from, I seem to remember 2016, 17 or 2017, 18, the
[Guest 1]: profile is gone.
[Guest 1]: So in all parts of the firm universe, you tend to see weak investment, and it's no longer
[Guest 1]: become very credit sensitive.
[Guest 1]: So that is saying something else, even firms who have operating cash are reluctant to invest.
[Guest 1]: And so that's why you've got to go deeper.
[Guest 1]: It's not just a matter of rescuing the financial system.
[Guest 1]: It was at that time, in 2013, 14, in 2014, 15, the highest priority for policymakers
[Guest 1]: should have been to undertake the financial reforms and fix the foundations of the financial
[Guest 1]: system.
[Guest 1]: But that opportunity was lost.
[Guest 1]: Today, of course, we should fix the financial system, we should make the financial system
[Guest 1]: work better.
[Guest 1]: But today, it's become a bigger and different problem compared to where we were in 2013,
[Guest 1]: 14, 2014, 15.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you to elaborate on that a little bit, and digress a bit from the budget itself
[Amit Varma]: and the budget making process itself, where you or Josh Feldman, I don't know which of
[Amit Varma]: you and I met you once at one of our weekend reading groups, pointed out, use the analogy
[Amit Varma]: of how our credit crisis is like a cancer in our economy.
[Amit Varma]: It's a root cause, which, you know, is making a lot of the rest of the economy very, very
[Amit Varma]: sick.
[Amit Varma]: Is there an understanding of this within the economic policymakers today?
[Amit Varma]: Is there anything in what they are doing, including in this budget that sort of addresses
[Amit Varma]: that or does that cancer continue to fester?
[Amit Varma]: And what exactly is that cancer?
[Guest 1]: The cancer lies in the fact that perhaps half of the banking and NBFC balance sheet is distressed.
[Guest 1]: Perhaps there are bad assets on the LIC balance sheet.
[Guest 1]: And LIC is the biggest financial firm in the country today.
[Guest 1]: And the managers inside these firms know that their firms are not in good shape.
[Guest 1]: And that leads to risk aversion, that leads to caution.
[Guest 1]: So that's the heart and soul of the cancer.
[Guest 1]: That cancer was, of course, created and aided and enabled by the financial regulators, who
[Guest 1]: created rules that made it possible for the financial firms to not recognize these problems.
[Guest 1]: So the regulators supported the firms in kicking the can down the road, hoping that there will
[Guest 1]: be some thing that will happen in the future whereby the problem will magically go away.
[Guest 1]: And of course, these things don't go away by themselves.
[Guest 1]: So I feel we're still stuck in a difficult and challenging balance sheet.
[Guest 1]: But I will emphasize that in the 2016-17 and 2017-18 data, it's surprising how you do not
[Guest 1]: find a clear linkage between firm credit stress and firm investment.
[Guest 1]: So something bigger is afoot.
[Guest 2]: In fact, this is something that Mahesh Vyas has also been writing about over and over
[Guest 2]: again.
[Guest 2]: So I would just like to add, you know, about the regulator point.
[Guest 2]: And it's very interesting.
[Guest 2]: So I've just finished writing this, you know, book on the banking crisis.
[Guest 2]: But from whatever I sort of researched, I think the thinking was that as we go along,
[Guest 2]: the economy will recover, the loan book will grow, and the bad loans will become a very
[Guest 2]: small proportion of the overall loans.
[Guest 2]: Now, there are fundamental mistakes here.
[Guest 2]: Obviously, one was the assumption that the economy will go back to growing at 9% and
[Guest 2]: all which did not happen.
[Guest 2]: The second mistake that I guess, was the fact that they hope that they would be able to
[Guest 2]: control the total amount of bad loans, which also did not happen.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they kept rising till 2018-19.
[Guest 2]: Now they are falling because they're being written off.
[Guest 2]: It's not like, you know, they're able to reclaim the bad loans, actually.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, and there are some figures I can't kind of get around, like in one of your pieces,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that the amount it's allocated towards recapitalizing is 2 lakh rupees.
[Guest 2]: But then see what also happens is, so this is very funny, okay.
[Guest 2]: And this happened in the interim budget that Piyush Goyal presented last year.
[Guest 2]: The allocation towards recapitalizing public sector banks was rupees 2 lakh.
[Guest 2]: And this year also, it's rupees 2 lakh.
[Guest 2]: Now, the thing here is that obviously, because we're working through recapitalization bonds,
[Guest 2]: so this is in a way budget neutral.
[Guest 2]: So essentially, what happens is that the government issues special bonds, the banks buy these
[Guest 2]: bonds, and then the government takes that money to reinvest in the bank itself.
[Guest 2]: So to that extent, it does not add to the budget, to the fiscal deficit immediately,
[Guest 2]: though over a period of time it does because the government has to pay interest on these
[Guest 2]: bonds.
[Guest 2]: And finally, you know, they need to repay it as well.
[Guest 2]: So obviously, the public debt goes up.
[Guest 2]: But the point is that when public sector banks have bad loans worth 7,80,000 crore, there
[Guest 2]: has to be, you know, some sort of investment that has to be made into them.
[Guest 2]: And I guess the assumption this time around is that we've sort of the banks have recovered
[Guest 2]: or probably they want to sell these banks, so which is not very clear.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the only thing that she said very clearly was, the government will sell the
[Guest 2]: remaining stake in IDBI to investors.
[Amit Varma]: This was what was said very, very clearly.
[Amit Varma]: How would public sector banks be recapitalized, Ajay, like, how does one deal with this problem?
[Amit Varma]: Because a lot of it to me seems like throwing good money after bad.
[Guest 1]: It's a tough problem.
[Guest 1]: I remember when Yashwant Sinha was planning that we should reduce the government ownership
[Guest 1]: in public sector banks from 51% to 33%.
[Guest 1]: He got quite some pushback, not from the left of center parties, but from within the BJP.
[Guest 1]: It was BJP MPs who were uncomfortable about the idea.
[Guest 1]: I think we need a lot more high quality discourse in the country around the meaning of public
[Guest 1]: money.
[Guest 1]: More people need to worry that every one rupee of government expenditure comes at an opportunity
[Guest 1]: cost of three rupees of GDP.
[Guest 1]: More people need to worry that for every 10,000 crore rupees, I can build 1,000 crore of expressway.
[Guest 1]: And is that a better use of money than recapitalizing banks?
[Guest 1]: So I feel we need to think more about what we do with public money.
[Guest 1]: If we could be more frugal in our use of public money, I feel the best of all worlds is to
[Guest 1]: privatize the public sector banks.
[Guest 1]: Maybe a government might like to hang on to an SBI for some government type functions,
[Guest 1]: but for the others, it seems feasible that each of them should be put through a big good
[Guest 1]: bank, bad bank operation.
[Guest 1]: And then the good bank is sold to a private person and the bad bank is liquidated by the
[Guest 1]: government as was done with UTI.
[Guest 1]: And I think that will be the best of all worlds.
[Guest 1]: I would say in passing that if that is your long range strategy, then it was not very
[Guest 1]: useful to do these mergers of PSU banks, because it's much better to sell smaller banks.
[Guest 1]: The better off selling a bank with a 50,000 crore balance sheet or a 1 lakh crore balance
[Guest 1]: sheet, rather than trying to deal with 2 lakh crore, 3 lakh crore of balance sheet.
[Guest 1]: So this is where a little bit of strategic thinking would have been useful that what's
[Guest 1]: our long run game plan?
[Guest 1]: Are we going to have public sector banks forever?
[Guest 1]: Are we going to privatize public sector banks?
[Guest 1]: If our long game was that we're going to privatize public sector banks, and we should have never
[Amit Varma]: done these mergers.
[Amit Varma]: Is it a long game?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm not saying do you agree with the long game or not?
[Amit Varma]: But do these people have any long game thinking at all?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it sort of all very ad hoc?
[Guest 1]: My understanding is that the current mainstream view of the long game is that there is no
[Guest 1]: problem and that incremental fixes will suffice.
[Guest 1]: But public sector banks did badly because of a few corrupt individuals and industrialists.
[Guest 1]: And we will appoint better people and the problems will end.
[Guest 1]: This is the mainstream view.
[Guest 1]: And I happen to disagree.
[Guest 1]: But this is my reading of where the mainstream stands.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a classic fallacy.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, this is totally true.
[Guest 2]: And I'll sort of admit something here.
[Guest 2]: Five, six years back, I was also of the view that you know, all these cronies have sort
[Guest 2]: of taken our money and all that from public sector banks.
[Guest 2]: But you know, having sort of written a longish document on it now and research the topic
[Guest 2]: a little better, I think obviously there are crony capitalists involved.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you can't deny that.
[Guest 2]: But that was not the only reason.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there were a lot of businesses just simply went overboard borrowing as well.
[Guest 2]: Having said that, you know, this is where it gets very interesting.
[Guest 2]: A lot of people, and this includes our policymakers, and I'll give an example here, believe, continue
[Guest 2]: to believe that public sector banks are the ones driving banking in this country, which
[Guest 2]: is absolute rubbish.
[Guest 2]: So if you look at this year's economic survey, the economic survey quotes that public sector
[Guest 2]: banks have 70% market share in Indian banking, which is rubbish of the highest order.
[Guest 2]: Because if you look at RBI data, as of September 30, public sector banks have 58% of the credit
[Guest 2]: and 62% of the deposits.
[Guest 2]: And this has been falling from the last five years, six years.
[Guest 2]: The deposits had peaked at around 75%, and the credit had peaked at around 72, 71%.
[Guest 2]: From that 72%, it's already fallen to 58.
[Guest 2]: What does this mean?
[Guest 2]: This essentially means that even though the government doesn't want to privatize these
[Guest 2]: banks, the banking sector is getting privatized on its own.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of these private banks are now attacking public sector banks directly.
[Guest 2]: You know, they go around, they go to depositors' homes, get their deposits transferred.
[Guest 2]: So all that is happening.
[Guest 2]: I mean, imagine the economic survey making a mistake as drastic as this, wherein the
[Guest 2]: share has fallen from 72 to 58%.
[Guest 2]: And you are still stuck at 70%.
[Guest 2]: I mean, 58% can be rounded off to 60%, it can be rounded off to 70%.
[Guest 2]: So in their heads, they're still, you know, ki bhai SBI hai aur, but then that's not true.
[Guest 2]: And you know, what is also happening is that the younger Indian does not want to deal with
[Guest 2]: these older banks.
[Guest 2]: I mean, when was the last time you heard, you know, a 30-year-old or a 25-year-old actually
[Guest 2]: went to a bank?
[Guest 2]: I mean, they like to do their banking online.
[Guest 2]: And the online banking systems of private banks are much, much better than some of these
[Guest 2]: public sector banks.
[Guest 1]: So...
[Guest 1]: So Vivek, I agree with you.
[Guest 1]: And I make an analogy with MTNL and BSNL.
[Guest 1]: You've privatized BSNL, great.
[Guest 1]: The government did not privatize MTNL and BSNL.
[Guest 1]: But by and large, it's irrelevant, because the business of telecom is gone, turned into
[Guest 1]: a private sector character.
[Guest 1]: And the resources are increasingly controlled by private persons.
[Guest 1]: And you know, we are today surrounded by firms like Jio and Airtel and ACT and so on.
[Guest 1]: And these are the telecom firms of India today.
[Guest 1]: So in similar fashion, that is a transformation happening in banking.
[Guest 1]: Or Air India for that matter.
[Guest 1]: But I do want to call an alarm on the distinction between airlines and telecom versus banking.
[Guest 1]: That in telecom or in airlines, we don't really mourn the transformation away from Air India
[Guest 1]: in favor of, you know, I was about to say jet airways, which we had in the episode.
[Guest 1]: But in the case of banking, there is a fundamental problem, which is that there is an old saying
[Guest 1]: amongst economists, the one thing worse than a public sector bank is a badly regulated
[Guest 1]: private sector bank.
[Guest 1]: So when the regulatory capacity is weak, private bankers will be rapacious and extract the
[Guest 1]: maximal personal benefits that they can out of every glitch in the regulations.
[Guest 1]: So if one could strategize this correctly, the right sequencing in which to do this is
[Guest 1]: to first undertake the required RBI reforms to build capability at RBI.
[Guest 1]: Because ultimately, RBI was the one on the watch as the entire banking difficulty unfolded
[Guest 1]: over the last...
[Guest 1]: Slipped on the watch.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And so we do need to recognize that there were failures of concepts and principles and
[Guest 1]: intellectual frameworks and regulations and of course, the implementation of those regulations.
[Guest 1]: And we need to fix that before we confront large complex private banks who will be hard
[Guest 1]: driving in achieving million dollar bonuses for individuals inside those banks.
[Guest 2]: In fact, talking about RBI and bad loans.
[Guest 2]: So after Governor Subbarao retired, he wrote this lovely little book on central banking.
[Guest 2]: And the interesting thing is that the term NPAs or bad loans aren't even used once in
[Guest 2]: the entire book.
[Guest 2]: And he was the governor from 2008 to 2013.
[Guest 2]: And most of the crisis unfolded between, I would say, 2010, 11, 12, and 13.
[Guest 2]: So that tells you as to where the attention, the focus of RBI was during those years.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I can understand 2008, 2009, given the financial crisis and everything else.
[Guest 2]: But for the remaining four years, when the crisis unfolded, there had to be something
[Guest 2]: that would have happened at the bank.
[Amit Varma]: So clearly...
[Amit Varma]: So, before we go in for a commercial break, three quick responses to what you guys just
[Amit Varma]: said and I think it's perhaps a subject for another episode on regulation and why banking
[Amit Varma]: is so different.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my tendency to view markets is that I think competition is the best regulation
[Amit Varma]: that you need the state to provide a firm rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: But beyond that, any regulation will tend or even the custom of being able to regulate
[Amit Varma]: will support some interest group that the benefit of the other competition is always
[Amit Varma]: the best regulator.
[Amit Varma]: So if you can ensure easy entry and competition, that takes care of a lot of those problems.
[Amit Varma]: And I know you'll have, you know, certain caveats to that and we can discuss that some
[Amit Varma]: other day.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, I like the way Vivek that you characterized the privatization of banking where you're
[Amit Varma]: saying that even if public sector banks aren't being privatized, banking itself is.
[Amit Varma]: And the analogy you do of, you know, telecom and airlines is to me very accurate.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I always say that if you know, I remember how they were government monopolies
[Amit Varma]: in the 80s, and you had to wait five years to get a phone and blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 2]: And I'll give you an example here.
[Guest 2]: So I still remember 1987-88, my father, who was a public sector employee, we took an LTC.
[Guest 2]: And it was the first time I think he was entitled for air travel.
[Guest 2]: And we went to Srinagar, which was hometown and we came back.
[Guest 2]: The total money we paid in Indian Airlines back then, from what he told me, and I remember
[Guest 2]: was 75,000 rupees back in the mid 80s.
[Guest 2]: 75,000 bucks, I mean, obviously, he didn't pay it, the company did.
[Guest 2]: But imagine, I mean, from that, I mean, even now, it would probably be the same amount
[Amit Varma]: for four people.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And if you just allow private participation in a lot of these areas, you'll soon find
[Amit Varma]: that government participation will become redundant.
[Amit Varma]: And the government should.
[Amit Varma]: And before we go into a break, the final point is, you know, I just wanted to point out the
[Amit Varma]: fallacy that you pointed out in this case, that people think that, oh, if we just put
[Amit Varma]: the right individuals in charge, it's okay, things will become better.
[Amit Varma]: It's a question of having good people running these things is a classic fallacy, which has
[Amit Varma]: ailed not just economic policy thinking, but also politics in India, where what really
[Amit Varma]: matters is you have institutions, you have good rules of the game in terms of the Constitution,
[Amit Varma]: and so on, which have good restraints on power.
[Amit Varma]: And what I keep saying is that you should have a system whereby even if the most murderous
[Amit Varma]: sociopath rises to power, he can't do much damage because of the way the rules of the
[Amit Varma]: game are.
[Amit Varma]: And we think too little in terms of institutions and too much in terms of individuals on which
[Amit Varma]: note we can go into a break.
[Guest 2]: Okay, I just want to take one of Ajay's points forward.
[Guest 2]: So you know, so on this thing of privatizing public sector banks, I don't what I don't
[Guest 2]: get is, I mean, I can understand you want to hang on to an SBI or a Bank of Baroda or
[Guest 2]: a Punjab National Bank or a Canara Bank.
[Guest 2]: What I don't get is why do you want to hang on to an Indian Overseas Bank, a Yuko Bank,
[Guest 2]: a United Bank, a Central Bank, a Bank of Maharashtra for that matter, a Punjab and Sindh Bank.
[Guest 2]: So if you look at their, you know, the books of these banks, most of them are like riddled
[Guest 2]: with bad loans.
[Guest 2]: But even that apart, the total amount of credit or loans that they've given out are miniscule
[Guest 2]: in proportion to the overall size of banking in India.
[Guest 2]: So forget, I mean, I mean, we can sell them if there are buyers, but if there are no buyers,
[Guest 2]: you can simply shut them down.
[Guest 2]: I mean, even that is a solution because that's going to sort of, you know, benefit the economy
[Guest 2]: quite a lot.
[Guest 2]: So it's just about so it's just, you know, at the end of the day, it's nuisance value
[Guest 2]: because there are people working there and a few lakh, I mean, the interesting thing
[Guest 2]: is there's a data point in this time the economic survey, which gives you that the total number
[Guest 2]: of employees in public sector banks in India are less than 9 lakh.
[Guest 2]: So if you take these smaller banks, the total number of employees would at best be one and
[Guest 2]: a half, one, one and a half.
[Guest 2]: So for one, one and a half lakh people in a population of 130 crore, why do you have
[Guest 2]: to take a bad solution?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, take the good solution and implement it.
[Amit Varma]: And what you see is the benefit of the status quo on these 9 lakh people, which is a concentrated
[Amit Varma]: but not the diffuse costs on all the rest of us.
[Guest 2]: Not just of...
[Guest 2]: Because the rest of us don't realize.
[Amit Varma]: The rest of us don't realize because we should, we all need a break.
[Amit Varma]: The citizens of this nation need a break.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll take a quick commercial break and then all the citizens of the nation can continue
[Amit Varma]: listening to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men.
[Amit Varma]: Home decor like wall plates, cushion covers and table linen and accessories like tote
[Amit Varma]: bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe,
[Amit Varma]: Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Gehra Baswani.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 15% discount, apply the code unseen, U-N-S-E-E-N.
[Amit Varma]: That's unseen for 15% off at indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ajay Shah and Vivek Kaul, Shah Rukh Khan and Shyam Banegal about cinema
[Amit Varma]: respectively.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek is looking most upset at that.
[Amit Varma]: Why should you be upset?
[Amit Varma]: He should be upset.
[Amit Varma]: You're Shah Rukh Khan.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm not.
[Amit Varma]: You're not.
[Amit Varma]: I just want to kind of sort of get back to the budget and you know, to carry on from
[Amit Varma]: what I was sort of the note I ended on just before the break is that and a point that
[Amit Varma]: you have also made very eloquently many times Ajay that you know, the problem is not that
[Amit Varma]: we no longer have good individuals who are sort of making the right decisions.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there are individuals in of the 90s in the early 2000s, who are now semi legends
[Amit Varma]: within the community like Mr. Kilker, Rakesh Mohan and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And they're not there.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not the problem as far as I can see it.
[Amit Varma]: The way it seems to me is that the problem rather is that somewhere the incentives have
[Amit Varma]: gone wrong, that somewhere, the individuals who are there are not thinking like that,
[Amit Varma]: because there is no need to because the pulls and pressures on them are very different.
[Amit Varma]: So how would like leaving I don't want you to comment on the specific dispensation right
[Amit Varma]: now leave that aside that is for enters like me, but just at a structural level, how would
[Amit Varma]: you reform the system?
[Amit Varma]: So you have the right kind of thinking emerges.
[Guest 1]: You're squarely on track that we should not personalize these discussions.
[Guest 1]: As Charles de Gaulle said, the graveyards are filled with indispensable men.
[Guest 1]: So I'm not fussed about individuals, but we should ask the question of incentives.
[Guest 1]: How do we create conditions under which various elements of economic policymaking deliver
[Guest 1]: reasonably good outcomes?
[Guest 1]: How do we take a more dispassionate process perspective to the role of these various pieces
[Guest 1]: of the Indian state?
[Guest 1]: Finally, individuals inside each of these organizations will look out for themselves
[Guest 1]: will pursue their own self-interest.
[Guest 1]: So we should not expect anything more of a line employee of a Ministry of Power or Ministry
[Guest 1]: of Civil Aviation, or a DEA or a DFS or RBI or SEBI other than to pursue their own interest.
[Guest 1]: What we should do is think about their role, their function, their accountability, their
[Guest 1]: checks and balances.
[Guest 1]: And it requires that kind of more dispassionate, little bit of detached perspective on analyzing
[Guest 1]: these institutions, modifying the rules of the game and the check and balance.
[Guest 1]: So as to create incentives for regular guys to produce superhuman performance.
[Guest 1]: I think that's where we have to go in terms of the economic policy reform.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense, not let nobility and excellence be happenstance, but actually allow for it
[Amit Varma]: to be manufactured by design.
[Guest 1]: Does that happen in any government in the world?
[Guest 1]: Oh, yes.
[Guest 1]: So I have been a frequent admirer of, for example, the UK Treasury.
[Guest 1]: The UK Treasury is a remarkable institution.
[Guest 1]: People come, people go, it's an institution.
[Guest 1]: It's a formal machine that knows how to think about economics, about budgets.
[Amit Varma]: And so yeah, this can be done.
[Amit Varma]: What is different there?
[Amit Varma]: What have they got right that we haven't?
[Amit Varma]: Why do those institutional incentives, how are they different?
[Amit Varma]: How do they sustain themselves there and not fall prey to the pressures of everyday electoral
[Guest 1]: politics?
[Guest 1]: So to take an example about tax policy that I just mentioned, there is a tax administration
[Guest 1]: element of the UK, which is called Her Majesty's, I'm trying to remember the name of the agency,
[Guest 1]: Her Majesty's Customs and Revenues or some such thing.
[Guest 1]: And they are the tax administrators and they collect taxes from individuals all over the
[Guest 1]: country.
[Guest 1]: They're kept at arm's length from the Treasury because you don't want the concept of the
[Guest 1]: political party in power inflicting income tax rates on their enemies.
[Guest 1]: So there's a very formal institutional apparatus to firewall the tax administrator from the
[Guest 1]: political process.
[Guest 1]: But then back to back with that, you need to construct tremendous amount of check and
[Guest 1]: balance so that that does not become a law unto itself.
[Guest 1]: So when we say independence for CBI or independence for RBI, that can very easily turn into officials
[Guest 1]: pursuing their own self-interest, which is probably worse than having them under political
[Guest 1]: control.
[Guest 1]: Then in the UK, the entire control of tax policy is only with the Treasury.
[Guest 1]: So it is only the equivalent of DEA that writes the tax policy.
[Guest 1]: So these are examples of formal rules and procedures that create the correct incentives
[Guest 1]: and then we get the better outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, when the framers of our constitution were writing the constitution
[Amit Varma]: or when the early rules of the game were being set, obviously, you can't expect them to get
[Amit Varma]: into such granularity on how specific ministries will function.
[Amit Varma]: We need these rules today.
[Amit Varma]: These tools presumably evolved over a period of time in England.
[Amit Varma]: What would be the sort of impetus for the politicians in charge to actually now build
[Amit Varma]: these checks and balances because it's in their interest to have the tax department
[Amit Varma]: under them, right?
[Amit Varma]: Why would they give that away?
[Guest 1]: So in the 70s and the 80s, we had some reasonably bad ideas in economic policy and it led to
[Guest 1]: the Hindu rate of growth and to balance of payment crises.
[Guest 1]: And that did give ample incentive to the politicians that business as usual is not working.
[Guest 1]: So in similar fashion, I think that men and nations will do the right thing after trying
[Guest 1]: every reasonable alternative.
[Guest 1]: And I think that a poor economic performance from 2011 onwards has got the pot on boil.
[Guest 1]: More and more people are curiously wondering where did we go wrong?
[Guest 1]: What gives?
[Guest 1]: And all of us are part of that discussion.
[Guest 1]: And I think that enough of the Indian intelligentsia is able to understand these problems and agree
[Guest 1]: on an approach on how to do this.
[Guest 1]: Then things will change.
[Guest 1]: I want to give you one last example about this kind of work.
[Guest 1]: In 2003, when Jaswant Singh was finance minister, he asked Vijay Kelkar to lead a team, which
[Guest 1]: was titled the Ministry of Finance for the 21st century.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: Now this is an incredibly important problem because the Indian Ministry of Finance is
[Guest 1]: frankly a 1960s institution.
[Guest 1]: It has not been thought through in these ways about organization, organization design processes,
[Guest 1]: incentives, check and balance information.
[Guest 1]: These foundational things have never been done differently since the 60s and the 70s.
[Guest 1]: So in 2003, Jaswant Singh said that we need a Ministry of Finance that is commensurate
[Guest 1]: with the complexities of what India is today and where we are going for the next 25 years.
[Guest 1]: And Vijay Kelkar led a team which had some remarkable people who worked on that.
[Guest 1]: And that report was presented to Mr. Chidambaram, who unfortunately ignored it completely.
[Guest 1]: But I think that that report is an example of the kind of work that is required.
[Guest 1]: Is it available in the public domain?
[Guest 1]: It was unfortunately never put up on the Ministry of Finance website.
[Guest 1]: So it's a little bit of the black art of Indian economic policy to know these things.
[Guest 1]: Periodically, people ask me what were the key ideas of that report.
[Guest 1]: Every one or two years, I get asked for what were the key insights of that report.
[Guest 1]: So I think it's lurking in the imagination of people, but it's not officially in the
[Guest 1]: public domain.
[Guest 1]: One should send in an RTI request to obtain a copy.
[Amit Varma]: If Saket Gokhale is listening to this, kindly put an RTI for this.
[Amit Varma]: This also matters because economics has, as I keep saying, humanitarian consequences.
[Amit Varma]: So before we go to the specifics of this budget, my big takeaway from the meta is that all
[Amit Varma]: of us are afraid that things are going to get worse.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps we should hope that things get worse because only a crisis seems to provoke the
[Amit Varma]: kind of deeper thinking and action that is sort of required in that case.
[Amit Varma]: Would you agree with that?
[Amit Varma]: Even though you have previously said in this episode that we overstate the importance of
[Guest 1]: crisis.
[Guest 1]: I worry that we have to lay the groundwork of the thoughts, the concepts, the frameworks
[Guest 1]: about what you would like to do different in the Indian economic policy problem.
[Guest 1]: There is a lack of knowledge in this field.
[Guest 1]: There is a lack of an elite consensus in this field.
[Guest 1]: There is a lack of community.
[Guest 1]: There is a lack of people that understand these things.
[Guest 1]: So I think now is the time for thinking and discussion and cogitation, the development
[Guest 1]: of people, the development of community, so that when there are politicians asking to
[Guest 1]: do things differently, then there is a body of knowledge and a community that is able
[Guest 1]: to carry these things forward.
[Guest 1]: Something commensurate to the initial conditions of 1991.
[Amit Varma]: And I would really hope that the young lady who is going to be finance secretary in the
[Amit Varma]: year 2045 is taking copious notes as she listens to this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, sort of moving on to you and your favorite company, which actually seems to your favorite
[Amit Varma]: company, of course, LIC.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to illustrate what you were saying, you know what you often keep saying
[Amit Varma]: and it's true of this budget that it looks like different parts of it have been written
[Amit Varma]: by different people.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the proposed LIC sale seems to be, sorry.
[Guest 1]: Amit, it's more than that.
[Guest 1]: Not only have different parts been written by different people, they've also been typeset
[Amit Varma]: in different fonts.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, really?
[Amit Varma]: In the budget?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing I was wondering was that, you know, again, to take a digression, Vivek,
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out that is some 18,900 words.
[Guest 2]: 1971 words.
[Guest 2]: 18,971 words.
[Guest 2]: So a good book these days has around 90,000 words or less than that, in fact.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'll give listeners a better context.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of my guests once transcribed a two hour episode I did with him, and it
[Amit Varma]: came to 25,000 words.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, 18,000 words.
[Guest 2]: No, but that depends on how fast you're speaking.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: So this, she spoke for almost two hours, 45 minutes, which is a record.
[Amit Varma]: And she gave up in the end, she couldn't complete.
[Amit Varma]: I thought the great master plan is she'll go on till the end of the news cycle and you're
[Amit Varma]: in the next news cycle.
[Amit Varma]: And then people have forgotten about the budget.
[Amit Varma]: But that hasn't happened.
[Amit Varma]: We don't let these things go.
[Guest 2]: I managed to listen to it because what happened was at around 1015 in the morning, I was feeling
[Guest 2]: terribly sleepy.
[Guest 2]: So I slept.
[Guest 2]: And then I woke up at around 1145, I woke up and I thought it will be done in an hour.
[Guest 2]: And then it finished at around 145.
[Guest 2]: So it was quite otherwise I would have fallen asleep if I hadn't slept before the budget
[Guest 2]: speech started.
[Guest 2]: I would have fallen asleep during the course of it just went on and on and on.
[Guest 2]: And there was, I mean, it was all sorts of things from Kalidasa to, I don't know, I mean,
[Guest 2]: to the great Harappan civilization, I mean, and a lot of very random posturing also let
[Amit Varma]: us show off our erudition and our knowledge and let us, you know, while we have the two
[Amit Varma]: Abdullahs in jail, let us quote from a Kashmiri poem written by a Kashmiri poet for senior
[Amit Varma]: Abdullah, Sheikh Abdullah.
[Amit Varma]: The irony of all of these things escape these people, but sort of let's kind of talk about
[Amit Varma]: and the reason I also want to talk about specifics, while this has been a really good discussion
[Amit Varma]: on the sort of meta level that I like rather indulgently, there has been great public demand
[Amit Varma]: for Mr. Vivek Kaul to comment on all the nitty gritties of the budgets and a number of people
[Amit Varma]: even asked me, why, when are you doing an episode on this budget?
[Amit Varma]: So I didn't plan to do an economics episode so soon.
[Amit Varma]: But since there was so much public demand here it is, but the next 12 episodes will
[Amit Varma]: not involve economics, LIC.
[Amit Varma]: So what you have written about LIC is that at one level is good news, because it means
[Amit Varma]: that you know, it will become more transparent, hopefully, hopefully, it showed the incentives
[Amit Varma]: go that way.
[Amit Varma]: But what you are confused about is that to quote you quote, LIC has acted as the internal
[Amit Varma]: financier of the government and has been used to bail out the government on multiple occasions.
[Amit Varma]: So it will be interesting to see whether this equation changes in the future, stop quote.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, so there are I mean, obviously, you know, once you list on the stock exchange,
[Guest 2]: you have to put out a certain amount of information.
[Guest 2]: So to that limited extent, it's it's a great move.
[Guest 2]: But then there are a lot of other issues, which will need clarification over a period
[Guest 2]: of time.
[Guest 2]: I mean, so LIC as of now, the structure of the LIC is I mean, and you would probably
[Guest 2]: know better is that it's essentially a pool of investors coming together, and their money
[Guest 2]: being invested, and then the returns being shared with them, right.
[Guest 2]: Also, whatever remains goes as dividend to the government.
[Guest 2]: So you you have to, you know, that that structure has to change, because once you become a listed
[Guest 2]: entity, there has to be a proper, you know, balance sheet, profit and loss account statement,
[Guest 2]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: Then there is this huge thing, as I said about how LIC has rescued so many government IPOs
[Guest 2]: over and over again, a lot of LIC, you know, the the policy, the endowment and the money
[Guest 2]: back policies, the money they collect, get simply get invested in government bonds.
[Guest 2]: So to that extent, it is a very large financier of of the government.
[Guest 2]: Also, there is the issue of solvency.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I think the capital backing LIC is some 5 crore rupees or something like that.
[Guest 2]: And that is primarily because the Indian government, obviously, backs it.
[Guest 2]: So will the government continue to back it after it is listed?
[Guest 2]: So there are a lot of questions which it will not be easy to list LIC.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I guess it'll it'll take at least, I mean, it should take them a minimum of seven,
[Guest 2]: eight months to just get the process going.
[Guest 2]: Another thing about this budget, which causes contradiction here is and so now, since we
[Guest 2]: are moving to a tax system where there will be no exemptions, and so people will not be
[Guest 2]: encouraged to save because they are saving tax.
[Guest 2]: And at the other end, you're trying to list LIC.
[Guest 2]: So LIC is premium.
[Guest 2]: The main reason that LIC survives is because people want to save tax.
[Guest 2]: Nobody buys life insurance from LIC, right?
[Guest 2]: People think they are buying life insurance, what they're buying is essentially a investment
[Guest 2]: product masquerading as a life insurance product, and something which helps them save.
[Amit Varma]: They're almost being nudged slash coerced towards it by bad incentives forced upon you
[Guest 2]: by the government.
[Guest 2]: Now, see, the other thing that comes out is like, you know, if you look at the these endowment
[Guest 2]: and the money back policies of LIC, the returns of them are hopelessly low 4%, 5%.
[Guest 2]: It's just that the average Indian or even the average human being cannot sit and calculate
[Guest 2]: the IRR on the policy that the internal rate of return on the policy that he or she is
[Guest 2]: buying.
[Guest 2]: So all this will gradually start to change.
[Guest 2]: And the moment you take away the tax thing, the tax incentive of investing in insurance,
[Guest 1]: the business model of LIC goes for a toss.
[Guest 1]: I think that it is an extremely positive move to think of putting LIC into an IPO and bringing
[Amit Varma]: it into the markets.
[Guest 1]: Accountability incentives, everything gets really happy that this has happened.
[Guest 1]: It's a tough, difficult thing.
[Guest 1]: You can just see all kinds of people getting unhappy, but this is the right thing to do.
[Guest 1]: So I'm very happy that that move has taken place.
[Guest 1]: As Vivek says, there are many hoops to jump.
[Guest 1]: I want to just emphasize two of those hoops.
[Guest 1]: The first of them is that we will need regulatory capacity at IRDA and we need to confront basics
[Guest 1]: about capital adequacy that it's almost amusing how little equity capital there is in LIC.
[Guest 1]: And LIC has given loans to a lot of the same firms who have defaulted on banks.
[Guest 1]: And I don't know how that mark-to-market is done inside LIC.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest 2]: This is another point.
[Guest 2]: The bad loans.
[Guest 2]: So it's like, you know, banks are facing bad loans and LIC has also got to...
[Guest 1]: LIC has lent to all the same people.
[Guest 1]: So if there is a problem inside many banks, it's probably a difficult problem inside LIC
[Guest 1]: as well.
[Guest 1]: On this note, I also want to emphasize the importance of IFRS accounting.
[Guest 1]: This is like high-geeky accounting terrain, but I'm one of the people that gets really
[Guest 1]: happy when you move accounting from a cash-based system to an accrual-based system.
[Unknown]: And that is what is called NDS.
[Guest 1]: LIC was on a cash-based system?
[Guest 1]: There are only two industries in India which are not in NDS at the fervent request of the
[Guest 1]: regulators.
[Guest 1]: RBI requested that we continue to do bad accounting for banks and IRDA requested that we continue
[Guest 1]: to do bad accounting for insurance companies.
[Guest 1]: So that's one more barrier that I think will end up needing to be crossed, that you really
[Guest 1]: need accrual-based accounting for an insurance company.
[Guest 1]: It's just totally wrong to think about an insurance company on a cash basis.
[Guest 1]: Because the demographic composition of the payouts and the new customers is profoundly
[Guest 1]: different.
[Guest 1]: On a cash basis, you may always feel you've got to do accrual-based accounting to think
[Guest 1]: in a forward-looking way about what's going on.
[Guest 1]: So I feel that these are hoops to cross.
[Guest 1]: But the point is, it is this decision that will force a reckoning on these questions,
[Guest 1]: which is so great.
[Amit Varma]: So, my next question is about something else.
[Guest 2]: This also brings us back to what Ajay was saying that, you know, different parts of
[Guest 2]: the budget have been written by different people.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I was again going to, my next question was also going to deal with debt dissonance
[Amit Varma]: and in the process managed to ask a larger question as well, a microcosm and a macrocosm.
[Amit Varma]: Microcosm of course is that the, interestingly, the NREGA budget has gone down a little bit,
[Amit Varma]: I think from 70,000.
[Guest 2]: 71 to 61.
[Amit Varma]: 71 to 61.
[Amit Varma]: But the larger question is that this is a government which, and so Mihir Sharma had
[Amit Varma]: a very interesting tweet about how this government seems to mistake reforms or is trying to recast
[Amit Varma]: reforms as welfarism, which, you know, is an extremely valid point.
[Amit Varma]: While it's interesting on the one hand, because all of these guys who are in power now used
[Amit Varma]: to rail against the welfarism of the Congress, the NREGA and so on, that the Congress did
[Amit Varma]: circa the late years of the last decade.
[Amit Varma]: What they have done since is that they have renamed some of those schemes, but they've
[Amit Varma]: kept a lot of the welfarism going.
[Amit Varma]: A lot of that welfarism is actually why they won votes in the heartland.
[Amit Varma]: It's not all, you know, as some allege, it's not all bigotry in Hindu Rashtra, the welfarism
[Amit Varma]: did help.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Parthaman did a bunch of pieces on this where he showed that people's perceptions
[Amit Varma]: of the Modi government was that they're actually doing a lot for the people and many of these
[Amit Varma]: schemes are delivering, if not for them, they've seen it deliver for others and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And in an episode I did with Ram Guha for this year's Republic Day, he also pointed
[Amit Varma]: out and he agreed with me that a lot of Prime Minister Modi's view of the world comes from
[Amit Varma]: what he has experienced as opposed to what he has read.
[Amit Varma]: So while a lot of the more abstract concepts which you need to know to run an economy might
[Amit Varma]: escape him like spontaneous order and positive sumness and so on, he gets the importance
[Amit Varma]: of things like water and roads and electricity, which, you know, and the delivery of those.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, he is someone who actually genuinely does believe in welfarism, ideologically
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Given all of this, what's going on here that, you know, they do stress more on welfarism
[Amit Varma]: than fundamental reforms, but at the same time, the NREGA budget has gone down, is there
[Guest 2]: some broader thinking?
[Guest 2]: I don't know.
[Guest 2]: So which is what left me confused, because when I looked at the numbers, so the NREGA
[Guest 2]: budgets are down from around 71,000 crore this year to 61,500 crore next year.
[Guest 2]: But the PM-Kisan allocation continues to be the same at 75,000 crore, even though this
[Guest 2]: year they'll end up spending only around 54,000 crore.
[Guest 2]: So my thinking is, you know, if you're giving the landowners some amount of money, you might
[Guest 2]: as well, you know, spend a little more money on NREGA.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I mean, I thought that was quite also, you know, when you keep putting equity into
[Guest 2]: dud companies like MTNL and BSNL, I mean, it's not fair that, you know, you cut 10,000
[Guest 2]: crore there.
[Guest 2]: So, I don't know.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I don't think there is a broad thinking behind all this, they just randomly, you know,
[Guest 2]: doing stuff here and there, because, you know, this this sort of contradiction is very difficult
[Guest 2]: to explain.
[Guest 2]: So,
[Guest 1]: Sanjiv Gupta Perhaps the political environment surrounding
[Guest 1]: welfarism changes when there is economic stress.
[Guest 1]: Perhaps if the same Mr. Modi had presided over a strong economy, his calls could have
[Guest 1]: been different.
[Guest 1]: I wonder how much of this push in favor of welfarism is, in fact, the consequence of
[Guest 1]: poor economic performance.
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta So to break that down, are you saying, if
[Amit Varma]: I interpret it correctly, then what you're basically saying is that, look, welfarism,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps for the word itself, welfarism, it has a positive ring to it makes for good political
[Amit Varma]: optics that, hey, you know, you guys are suffering, we're going to help you out, we're going to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, these are all the handouts we are sort of going to do.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, you know, economists would know that there is a tradeoff between redistribution
[Amit Varma]: and growth, and growth is what actually lifts people out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: But because growth isn't happening, and all of that, they're going for the political optics,
[Amit Varma]: is that right?
[Guest 1]: Sanjiv Gupta Yeah, but I don't know how much of this is
[Guest 1]: a reflection of the underlying ideology, as opposed to an expedient response to the difficulties
[Unknown]: that we face.
[Guest 2]: Sanjiv Gupta Incentives again, therefore,
[Guest 2]: Sanjiv Gupta In fact, you know, another thing, this sort
[Guest 2]: of slightly different point, you know, a lot of media this time, went around reporting
[Guest 2]: that subsidies have been cut.
[Guest 2]: Now, you know, that that was so wrong at many levels, with subsidies have not been cut,
[Guest 2]: the government is just not paying the subsidies, okay.
[Guest 2]: So take take like, I mean, Food Corporation of India, best example,
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta Which is actually your favorite company.
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta I was thinking when you said favorite company,
[Guest 2]: you would say Food Corporation, but that's okay.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, look at Food Corporation of India, right?
[Guest 2]: So the food subsidies for 2019-20, when the budget was presented, were around 1,84,000
[Guest 2]: crore.
[Guest 2]: In the revised number, it's around 1,09,000 crore, okay.
[Guest 2]: So that essentially means that the food subsidy has been cut by close to 75,000 crore.
[Guest 2]: Food Corporation of India's subsidy bill this year stands at 3,17,905 crore, okay.
[Guest 2]: So it's a difference of around 2,10,000 crore, which the government has to pay FCI, but it
[Guest 2]: is not.
[Guest 2]: Now, the government has to pay FCI because FCI is buying rice and wheat from farmers
[Guest 2]: directly at a certain minimum support price.
[Guest 2]: And it's selling that rice and wheat at a very low price through the public distribution
[Guest 2]: system.
[Guest 2]: So that difference has to be paid for so that, you know, FCI remains a going.
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta That's a mechanism of the food subsidy.
[Guest 2]: Sanjiv Gupta So, so it's not that food subsidies been
[Guest 2]: cut, you know, food subsidies still the same.
[Guest 2]: It's just that FCI is not being paid.
[Guest 2]: And FCI is now being partly financed out of the National Small Savings Fund, which is
[Guest 2]: where the investment that you know, people make in the National Savings Scheme, NSS goes
[Guest 2]: to.
[Guest 2]: So they are essentially borrowing money from that.
[Guest 2]: And the remaining part of the money is being borrowed from banks.
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta So is NSS forced to lend to the FCI?
[Guest 2]: Sanjiv Gupta It's like it's government one hand, money
[Amit Varma]: moving from one hand.
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta Are we incentivized to invest in the NSS because
[Guest 1]: of tax savings?
[Guest 1]: Sanjiv Gupta The rates are very high.
[Amit Varma]: Sanjiv Gupta So basically, these sort of coercive regulations
[Amit Varma]: force us to invest in NSS to save tax, and that money then goes to pay FCI bills, which
[Guest 2]: the government isn't paying, and then it is claiming that hey, we will do subsidies.
[Guest 2]: Sanjiv Gupta So there are multiple problems here.
[Guest 2]: So the first thing is that, so FCI is buying this rice and wheat, and it ends up buying
[Guest 2]: an excess amount of rice and wheat.
[Guest 2]: So I was just seeing looking at the numbers for as of January, FCI had around 75 lakh
[Guest 2]: tons of rice and wheat when it needed to have some half of that or something like that,
[Guest 2]: right.
[Guest 2]: The excess stock has been paid for by the FCI, which has borrowed money from NSS, and
[Guest 2]: from banks.
[Guest 2]: So basically, it's been paid for by UNI, right, I mean, it's ultimately comes down to us.
[Guest 2]: The second thing that happens here, and this is where it all starts getting very, very
[Guest 2]: bizarre is that when the FCI borrows all this money from banks, obviously, there is going
[Guest 2]: to be crowding out, less money left for others to borrow, and your interest rates remain
[Guest 2]: where and you know.
[Guest 2]: The other interesting thing is because NSS needs money, the interest rates on that continue
[Guest 2]: to remain higher than fixed deposits, because NSS needs money, because it has to finance
[Guest 2]: FCI, it has to finance the National Highway Authorities of India.
[Guest 2]: So all this comes together to essentially ensure that monetary policy does not work,
[Guest 2]: because the government needs a high interest rate environment to keep all this going.
[Guest 2]: And because it needs a high interest rate environment, your, you know, your interest
[Guest 2]: on small savings schemes continue to remain higher than interest on FDs.
[Guest 2]: So because interest on small savings schemes continue to remain high, FD interest rates
[Guest 2]: cannot be slashed, even though, you know, the monetary policy has been cutting the repo
[Amit Varma]: rate for a while now.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written articles about how cutting the repo rate doesn't actually make a practical
[Guest 2]: difference in our lives.
[Guest 2]: As of now, it doesn't.
[Guest 1]: It's been sort of...
[Guest 1]: I just want to riff on what he has been describing.
[Guest 1]: Everything you say is, of course, correct.
[Guest 1]: But here's the deeper story of what happens.
[Guest 1]: The first element is that social systems are complicated.
[Guest 1]: And each move you make has unintended consequences.
[Guest 1]: And the second problem is, this is the consequence of low strategy, high tactics.
[Guest 1]: So every day, one feels very clever, coming out with one more element of a solution, which
[Guest 1]: seems to solve my point of pain today.
[Guest 1]: But actually, that just creates a more and more intricate web of interlocking policy
[Guest 1]: constraints that tie down policymakers in knots.
[Guest 1]: And this is why there is a greater role for strategy.
[Guest 1]: So very often, people tend to wonder that what's wrong with just taking one day at a
[Guest 1]: time?
[Guest 1]: You see a problem, you solve the problem.
[Guest 1]: It doesn't suffice.
[Guest 1]: In public policy, it's important to have a strategic sense.
[Guest 1]: Who am I?
[Guest 1]: What is the role of the state?
[Guest 1]: What market failure am I addressing?
[Guest 1]: What is the detritus of inherited, messy interventions and institutions that we need to wind down
[Guest 1]: gradually?
[Guest 1]: And then many decisions can be taken that will put us on a better path.
[Guest 2]: Ajay Shah So I just wanted to sort of make one more
[Guest 2]: point.
[Guest 2]: No, no, that's fine.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's a very important point.
[Guest 2]: So no, what I wanted to say was, Ajay was talking about how the rate of investment has
[Guest 2]: come down dramatically.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: So I'm obviously simplifying things here a little.
[Guest 2]: So when, because the rate of investment has come down, obviously jobs haven't been created
[Guest 2]: at the same pace as when needed.
[Guest 2]: When jobs haven't been created, obviously a lot of people are not making money or they're
[Guest 2]: not making the kind of money they would have otherwise made.
[Guest 2]: So income growth has also come down.
[Guest 2]: Because income growth has come down, people have been consuming a larger proportion of
[Guest 2]: their incomes or they have been borrowing to finance consumption.
[Guest 2]: So when you do both, obviously what happens, your rate of savings comes down, right?
[Guest 2]: In all this environment, while the rate of savings has been coming down, the public sector
[Guest 2]: borrowing, which is central government, state governments, our budget has been going up,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: So how will interest rates come down?
[Guest 2]: So it's all, it's not like you're doing this and that doesn't get impacted.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's all connected at some level.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of it is, you know, people don't even understand that it is connected.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And so my next question is, again, something you've written about with a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of bemusement and which the middle class was very, you know, eagerly looking at, which
[Amit Varma]: is what is going to happen with income tax.
[Amit Varma]: And there was this initial impression that, oh, yes, the taxes have gone down.
[Amit Varma]: But that is not the case.
[Amit Varma]: And most people are still confused about whether they will be paying more or less.
[Guest 2]: So basically, you know, the government wants you to understand the Income Tax Act.
[Guest 2]: And it also wants you to know how to use an Excel sheet and figure out as to which is
[Guest 2]: the better system for you.
[Guest 2]: But largely, you know, if you are the kind who uses the deductions and exemptions that
[Guest 2]: are available, you are better off on the present system.
[Guest 2]: And from what I've been told, I mean, I haven't read the finance bill.
[Guest 2]: From what I've been told, if you move to the new system, you cannot go back to the old
[Guest 2]: one.
[Guest 2]: Now, I mean, so I think, you know, if the idea was to simplify, there was no point in
[Guest 2]: having two systems.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you could have had even lower rates, so as to ensure that the actual tax comes
[Guest 2]: down.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: And incomes go up.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But I think as of now, and this obviously is a short term solution, people, there has
[Guest 2]: to be more money in the hands of people, you know, this is not the time to tax.
[Guest 2]: Now, the problem here is, one is that, you know, whether there is more money or not in
[Guest 2]: the hands of people, that in itself is a question.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of it is psychological, you know, when, as a nation, we are obsessed with the
[Guest 2]: government budget.
[Guest 2]: Now, why is that?
[Guest 2]: That is because finance ministers have a proclivity of changing, you know, income tax rates or
[Guest 2]: introducing new exemptions, new deductions, so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: So, our obsession with the budget is not because we want to know, whether we have become protectionist
[Guest 2]: or not.
[Guest 2]: It is because all of us want to know whether our take home is growing, or we'll have to
[Guest 2]: pay more tax.
[Guest 2]: So, at the end of the day, it's very, very psychological.
[Guest 2]: Now, if you had actually cut taxes, and if you had clearly told people that, yes, the
[Guest 2]: money in your hands is going to go up, they were more likely to spend or, you know, essentially
[Guest 2]: consume more.
[Guest 2]: And that would have sort of helped the economy in a very small sort of way.
[Guest 2]: But here, what we ended up doing was creating this confusion.
[Guest 2]: And you have now all the CAs badgering their heads.
[Guest 2]: And I think this government just wants to make sure that CAs make more and more money.
[Amit Varma]: You regret not being a CA, Vivek?
[Guest 2]: You regret not being a CA?
[Guest 2]: I mean, I regret a lot of things in life, but that can be an episode in itself.
[Guest 2]: No, so I found it very, very, this was a low lying, low hanging fruit, which could have
[Guest 2]: been.
[Guest 2]: Also, the interesting thing is that in the budget speech, the finance minister said that
[Guest 2]: the government will lose 40,000 crore because of this new system.
[Guest 2]: But if you check the receipts of the government, the assumption is personal income tax collections
[Guest 2]: will go up 14%.
[Guest 2]: So, how is that possible that 40,000 crores will be lost and there is an increase of 14%
[Guest 2]: there?
[Guest 2]: I mean, this is a little bizarre.
[Guest 2]: In an environment where they have assumed that the nominal GDP growth will be 10%, if
[Guest 2]: you look at the gross tax numbers for this year, the increase assumed is 4%, whereas
[Guest 2]: if you look at the gross tax numbers for the first nine months, they are 3% lower than
[Guest 2]: the last year's thing.
[Guest 2]: So, in this environment, how can you assume a 14% growth?
[Guest 2]: So, there are a lot of, in fact, the budget math is very, very shaky this time around.
[Amit Varma]: Not only is the math shaky, the shaky math is based on dubious data.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, is it fair to say that to some extent, these guys are winging it too?
[Guest 2]: Oh, yes.
[Guest 2]: In fact, yesterday, late night, I saw this beautiful video where two old men, A.K. Bhattacharya,
[Amit Varma]: who's the editorial director of Binistandar and T.N. Nainan, who's the chairman, and they
[Guest 2]: were talking, and it's an 18 minute video, which everyone should watch.
[Guest 2]: And Nainan kept making this point over and over again as to, you know, should we take
[Guest 2]: these numbers seriously?
[Guest 2]: So, and, you know, nobody has seen more budgets in India than Nainan has.
[Amit Varma]: He's that old?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are people who've seen more budgets, but no one has analysed more budgets.
[Guest 1]: I want to look at this in a larger problem of the republic.
[Guest 1]: Okay, so let's take one step back and say, why do we have a budget?
[Guest 1]: Okay, we have a budget because the legislature wants to have oversight on the executive.
[Guest 1]: The legislature wants to say to the executive, show me what taxes you will collect.
[Guest 1]: Show me how you will spend it.
[Guest 1]: I must be satisfied that your spending plans are consistent with my political values and
[Guest 1]: beliefs.
[Guest 1]: Okay, so that's the concept of the budget.
[Guest 1]: Or take a corporation.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: Why do we have a budget?
[Guest 1]: Because the board mistrusts the management.
[Guest 1]: And that is why a budget is established, whereby the management is on a tight leash.
[Guest 1]: And through the year, the legislature has to hold the executive accountable for what
[Guest 1]: it has done in terms of the actual operationalisation of the taxation side, and of the spending
[Guest 1]: side.
[Guest 1]: Okay, so for example, all of us reading about news in the United States, it is so interesting
[Guest 1]: and fascinating to discover that when Congress voted for money to be given as aid to Ukraine,
[Guest 1]: it was illegal for Donald Trump to withhold that money.
[Guest 1]: Because when the legislature votes on a certain spending, you have to do it.
[Guest 1]: That is the meaning of being a representative democracy, where political power ultimately
[Guest 1]: vests with the legislature.
[Guest 1]: I feel that what we're getting in India today is a part of that larger problem, which is
[Guest 1]: the collapse of the legislature as an institution, where we go through a show of some tax proposals
[Guest 1]: and some spending proposals, and the year unfolds in very different ways.
[Guest 1]: And the legislature frankly exerts no force on the executive to create accountability.
[Amit Varma]: And the executive comes from the legislature, so you know, which is, you know, not the case
[Amit Varma]: in the US where you have a separate election for the president.
[Guest 2]: In fact, I'll just give an example on what Ajay said.
[Guest 2]: So in 2018-19, the government expected to earn a total GST of 6,26,000 crore.
[Guest 2]: It was revised to 5,26,000 crore.
[Guest 2]: Finally, they managed to collect 4,58,000 crore, which is 25% lower.
[Guest 2]: What is the point of making these projections if they're going to be so widely, you know,
[Amit Varma]: of the things?
[Amit Varma]: So does that then merit a deeper look at the electoral system?
[Amit Varma]: If you're saying that, you know, the legislator and the executive are too much in lockstep,
[Amit Varma]: you know, unlike the US, for example, where there's a separate election for the president
[Amit Varma]: and you know, the Congress and the Senate are separate and they can, you know, they
[Amit Varma]: can act as a check on each other.
[Amit Varma]: That's not the case here.
[Amit Varma]: And would it also be fair to say that the legislature has, you know, the anti-defection
[Amit Varma]: law plays a part.
[Amit Varma]: One of the unintended consequences is that you cannot speak against your party, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore you could run parliament from an Excel sheet.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need people to even show up.
[Amit Varma]: I've had an episode on this in the past.
[Guest 1]: I do think that of the three branches of government in India, the legislature has shaped up as
[Guest 1]: the weakest component.
[Guest 1]: It is not pulling its weight because of the anti-defection bill.
[Guest 1]: The legislative negotiation now only takes place between the heads of the political parties,
[Guest 1]: but not the average parliamentarian.
[Guest 1]: So parliamentarians have switched off, frankly, they don't care about legislation.
[Guest 1]: When is the last time there was a private member bill?
[Guest 1]: So bills are drafted by joint secretaries.
[Guest 1]: This is really a travesty that the legislative function is now being taken over by the executives.
[Guest 1]: And I think this is an important failure of Indian democracy.
[Guest 1]: I do not understand the problem enough to be able to think about how to solve it.
[Guest 1]: But I think it's important to recognize that the weakest piece of our constitutional system
[Guest 1]: today is the legislature.
[Guest 1]: On the same note, you may remember in the Kelkar and Shah book, when we talk about decentralization,
[Guest 1]: the only important caveat that we have is the unchecked power of a chief minister at
[Guest 1]: a state level.
[Guest 1]: We simply don't have enough check and balance surrounding a chief minister and a chief minister
[Guest 1]: can easily become a bit despotic.
[Guest 1]: And then that is no foundation for performance.
[Guest 1]: We need to think more carefully about how these institutions can evolve so that there
[Guest 1]: is an everyday check and balance between legislature and executive at the state level as well.
[Amit Varma]: No, very wise words and I mean, an example of a despotic chief minister who then became
[Amit Varma]: prime minister and tried to be as despotic is coming to mind, but I won't say it here.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's kind of, I'll obviously link all your respective pieces from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes so people can dive into them for the details.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek has many entertaining things to say about Nirmala Tai's budget speech.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of wind up now and sort of, I'll ask both of you, you know, are you hopeful
[Amit Varma]: of the system changing where the budget is this big media tamasha, but it is actually
[Amit Varma]: just people winging it and it really doesn't mean anything.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I mean, barring a crisis, you've been an inside of, you know, in policy circles
[Amit Varma]: for decades, if that doesn't make you feel too old, Ajay, you know, is there also an
[Amit Varma]: impetus besides the standard impetus of, oh, we may have a crisis or oh, there may be something
[Amit Varma]: political besides that.
[Amit Varma]: Is there also an incentive from elite intellectual circle to a recognition of this problem or
[Amit Varma]: everyone's just sort of improvising with the moment?
[Guest 1]: I think that inside the BJP also, like everywhere else, there is a perception of difficulties
[Guest 1]: in the economy.
[Guest 1]: And I think that every politician in India is sincerely incentivized to understand these
[Guest 1]: events and to think of what to do different.
[Guest 1]: So in that sense, I think Indian democracy is working.
[Guest 1]: No politician wants to go into elections, maybe a state election, with one hand tied
[Guest 1]: behind their back, owing to poor performance.
[Guest 1]: So let's not think that elections in India have degenerated to a point where performance
[Guest 1]: does not count.
[Guest 1]: Performance always counts.
[Guest 1]: And
[Guest 1]: A few state elections have shown that now.
[Guest 1]: So I think every politician in India sees that we had a 20 year run of high growth from
[Guest 1]: 91 to 2011.
[Amit Varma]: And that something has gone wrong.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, I mean, you can you can cherry pick evidence, but you can also come to the
[Amit Varma]: opposite conclusion from evidence, for example, 2019, you know, this government did win after
[Amit Varma]: five years of disastrous economic management.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, they had a landslide win in the UP elections after DEMO.
[Guest 1]: So I'm not here to say that performance is the only thing.
[Guest 1]: The limited question that I would ask you is that if you could have a one on one private
[Guest 1]: conversation with anybody in Indian politics, and you would pose this question that as the
[Guest 1]: incumbent, would you have rather walked into the 2019 election holding good performance?
[Guest 1]: I think the answer will be loud and clear.
[Guest 1]: Yes, that the leadership of Modi and Amit Shah pulled off a victory against all odds.
[Guest 1]: But if they could dream of a different world, they would have loved to go into that election
[Guest 1]: with better performance.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the counterfactual, therefore, is that had they actually delivered on a lot
[Amit Varma]: of their rhetoric from 2014, they could have won an even more landslide win in 2019.
[Guest 1]: So I don't think that any politician would like to go back to elections, holding bad
[Guest 1]: performance.
[Guest 1]: And I think we are increasingly getting the point all over India, that there was great
[Guest 1]: GDP growth from 1991 to 2011.
[Guest 1]: And from 2011 till today, something has gone wrong.
[Guest 1]: And we are at the early stages of this cogitation of developing the third paradigm of Indian
[Guest 1]: economic policy.
[Guest 1]: And I'm optimistic that things will change, that we are a remarkable country.
[Guest 1]: We are a precocious country, where at a very low level of per capita GDP, at a time when
[Guest 1]: female literacy was 6%, we enacted a remarkable constitution.
[Guest 1]: We are a country that is a child of Gandhiji, Tagore and Nehru, and we'll get better.
[Amit Varma]: Wise words.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, so next year, when the budget rolls around, you see yourself writing pretty much
[Amit Varma]: the same kind of pieces, at which point even Siddhant cannot bemoan it on Twitter, because
[Amit Varma]: he will be repeating himself.
[Guest 2]: Difficult thing to say.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, I mean, on past evidence, one would say the same.
[Guest 2]: Bad news will sort of continue.
[Guest 2]: No, I mean, see, the thing is this.
[Guest 2]: So until, you know, a few days back, the nominal GDP growth for this year was supposed to be
[Guest 2]: at a 43-year low.
[Guest 2]: But then since we revised last year's data, so this year's data is suddenly now looking
[Guest 2]: a little better.
[Guest 2]: So, now we are at a 17-year low.
[Guest 2]: So, the point is, if the GDP growth is at a 40-year low, and if that does not give you
[Guest 2]: incentive enough to do the right things, what else will, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, 40-year low is like as bad as it could get.
[Guest 2]: I mean, okay, let's even, I mean, this is nominal, but even when you look at real GDP,
[Guest 2]: we were at a 10-year low.
[Guest 2]: So that 10-year low is like, and that 10-year low was also because of the financial crisis,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: So, if that does not give our government and our politicians the incentive to do, carry
[Guest 2]: out the major reforms and do the right things, then, I mean, see, I'm not even, I mean, you
[Guest 2]: know, people talk about these big philosophical reforms and take something like a goods and
[Guest 2]: services tax.
[Guest 2]: Okay, it's been two and a half years since it's been in place.
[Guest 2]: And every month there is some change, this change, that change, I'm willing to accept
[Guest 2]: that as well.
[Guest 2]: But when I upload my return, let that return get uploaded in one time.
[Guest 2]: Let the OTP come to me, you know, when it has to.
[Guest 2]: I mean, these things, these are like, you know, the minutest, the simplest of things
[Guest 2]: that need to be done, or the entire GST system has been made with the assumption that people
[Guest 2]: will not make mistakes, okay, everyone will file everything and they'll do it correctly.
[Guest 2]: So recently, I had this experience, one of the media houses I write for raised a query,
[Guest 2]: and this was regarding a query on an invoice I had generated in 2018-19.
[Guest 2]: So the date of the invoice did not match with the date I had registered against that invoice
[Guest 2]: in my return.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so obviously, they wanted it corrected.
[Guest 2]: So it seems the law is such that you can only correct a mistake that you make during the
[Guest 2]: course of that financial year.
[Guest 2]: This is stupid, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, and these are not huge amounts.
[Guest 2]: I mean, people, you know, it's a 20,000 rupee, 25,000 rupee bill.
[Guest 2]: So I mean, if people, you know, if you sort of make even changes to these simple things
[Guest 2]: and make life simpler for people who follow the GST, that in itself will be a huge thing.
[Guest 2]: But that is also not happening.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: It's been an awesome experience talking to both of you guys addressing high philosophical
[Amit Varma]: concerns, like the structure of government, as well as, you know, everyday granular problems
[Amit Varma]: like where is the OTP for my GST filing?
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, thanks a lot for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy In Service of the Republic by Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah, outstanding
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: I can't praise it enough.
[Amit Varma]: Also, check out the many, many books written by Vivek Kaul, including the Easy Money Trilogy
[Amit Varma]: and India's Big Government.
[Amit Varma]: Do not search for my name.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to follow Vivek on Twitter, you can follow him at Kaul underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to follow me on Twitter, you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-E-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to follow Ajay Shah on Twitter, too bad you can't, he's not there.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in and ThinkPragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: To learn more about their public policy courses, head on over to takshashila.org.in.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.